---
layout: default
title: CHAPTER TWO
parent: § Antisemitism Today and Its Relationship to Jewish Identity and Religious Denomination   
grand_parent: A 
nav_order: 20 
---
<style>
.dont-break-out {
  /* These are technically the same, but use both */
  overflow-wrap: break-word;
  word-wrap: break-word;

     -ms-word-break: break-all;
  /* This is the dangerous one in WebKit, as it breaks things wherever */
  word-break: break-all;
  /* Instead use this non-standard one: */
  word-break: break-word;
}

.youtube-container {
    position: relative;
    width: 100%;
    height: 0;
    padding-bottom: 56.25%;
}
.youtube-video {
    position: absolute;
    top: 0;
    left: 0;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
}

</style>

<div class="dont-break-out" markdown="1">

1. TOC
{:toc}

## CHAPTER TWO
### Introduction
The latest numbers available at the time of this study indicate that approximately 7,500,000 Jews live in the U.S. (Tighe et al., 2019). This number includes individuals who report being Jewish by religion, as well as people who self-identify as Jewish based on ethnicity (Lipka, 2013). The majority of Jews report being affiliated with a synagogue (69%), while 30% reported no affiliation with any religious institution (Pew Research Center, 2013). In general, 62% of Jews view Jewish identity as a matter of ancestry; only 15% view Jewish identity as a matter primarily based on religion, and 23% report that Jewish identity is based on both ancestry and religion (Pew Research Center, 2013). These numbers suggest that Jewish identity is complex and defined differently by each Jew. However, religious and cultural identification is not the only aspect that impacts Jewish identity. Antisemitism tends to play a role as well. The latest data on antisemitic hate crimes made available by ADL show hate crimes against the Jewish community have been increasing since 2014. For instance, reported hate crimes against the Jewish community went up from 695 incidents in 2015 to 834 in 2016 (Southern Poverty Law Center, 2017). This trend has continued through 2017 and 2018 (ADL, 2017a; FBI, 2019).

The purpose of this chapter is to provide the reader with more in-depth information about Jewish identity and the impact of antisemitism. This chapter contains an overview of the literature regarding ethnic identity broadly, Jewish identity, and the factors that impact this identity. I provide information about the three major Jewish denominations (Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform Judaism). In this chapter, I also present an overview of the history of antisemitism, as well as current ways in which antisemitism is expressed, such as anti-Zionism. I explore the impact of antisemitism on Jewish individuals and discuss the role that counselor educators and professional counselors have in promoting and providing culturally competent services to the Jewish community. Additionally, I introduce the theoretical framework used for the study.

### Ethnicity and Ethnic Identity
Identity development is considered to be an important aspect of every individual’s life, “as knowing who one is may be one of the most fundamental components of being human” (Galliher, Mclean, & Syed, 2017, p. 2011). Since the 1960s, researchers have been developing theories to explain human identity development. Erikson (1968) was one of the first to create a lifespan theory of social identity development that defines the age range at which a particular crisis occurs. His theory contained eight psychosocial stages: 1) Infancy – trust vs. mistrust, 2) Early childhood – autonomy vs. shame and doubt, 3) Preschool – initiative vs. guilt, 4) School age - industry vs. inferiority, 5) Adolescence - identity vs. role confusion, 6) Young adulthood – intimacy vs. isolation, 7) Adulthood – generativity vs. stagnation, and 8) Old age – ego integrity vs. despair (Carver & Scheier, 2004). Erikson (1968) viewed identity development as an essential task of adolescence, as well as a requirement to deal effectively with the challenges during later stages. Marcia (1980) further developed Erikson´s model by identifying four identity statuses: foreclosure, diffusion, moratorium, and achievement. According to Marcia (1980), the identity statuses are determined by the interplay of a crisis (an incident that forces individuals to think about their identity) and the level of commitment to the identity. These identity models have served as the basis for ethnic identity models and current research on ethnic identity (Yip, 2013). Researchers and practitioners in the counseling field have been interested in understanding how ethnic identity impacts the counseling relationship, individuals’ worldviews, mental health, as well as their daily lived experiences (Phinney, 1996; Syed & Azmitia, 2009; Syed & Juang, 2014).

The term ethnicity is a complex construct and is not easily defined (Chávez & GuidoDiBrito, 1999). The term is often used interchangeably with race, especially outside of the U.S. According to Morning (2008), there is no international definition for the term ethnicity. The distinction between ethnicity and race tends to occur predominately in countries with a slaveholding history and is not used in Asian and European countries (Morning, 2008). According to Berg, Schor, and Soto (2014), the term race prompts different associations in the U.S. and Europe. For instance, in Germany, the term race is tainted by its connection to the racist Nazi regime and has been replaced with the term ethnicity (Berg et al., 2014). In the U.S., ethnicity tends to refer to a combination of national origin, culture, and common language, while race tends to be defined as a biological category that is based primarily on physical features and character qualities (Quintana, 2007). I have decided to use the term ethnicity exclusively. An increasing number of researchers acknowledge that ethnicity and race are socially constructed and that both terms tend to encompass a sense of group membership (Morning, 2008; Quintana, 2007).

According to Chávez and Guido-DiBrito (1999), the concept of race tends to be used by individuals to distance themselves from other groups and is thus a process of “othering.” Ethnicity, on the other hand, tends to be viewed as a way for individuals to identify with a particular population based on common history, ancestry, and cultural practices. Thus, ethnic identity refers to how individuals identify themselves regarding their ethnicity. In the U.S., ethnicity tends to be a self-assigned category, unlike in Europe where ethnicity tends to combine the terms race and ethnicity and is not necessarily a self-assigned identity. This distinction may be meaningful especially when studying the Jewish community; Jews have and continue to be viewed by some people as an ethnic group and thus can choose their group affiliation. Some people may view Jews as a racial group and consequently assign Jews an identity. This particular detail may need to be considered when researching the ethnic identity of Jews in the counseling context as it suggests that Jewish identity is distinct from other ethnic identities. Moreover, this particular detail may mean that available research on other ethnic groups may not be generalizable to the Jewish population. Consequently, more research specific to the Jewish community and the Jewish identity is needed to ensure not only a better understanding of Jewish identity but also to ensure that counseling services are accommodating the needs of Jewish individuals.

Ethnic identity, like ethnicity and race, is a social construct (Chávez & Guido-DiBrito, 1999). Ethnic identity tends to be defined as a consciously or unconsciously chosen identity based on common history, traditions, beliefs, behaviors, and values. Its development starts at an early age and is a life-long process. This means that one´s ethnic identity can change over a lifetime (Phinney et al., 2007). Ethnic identity plays a role in most people’s lives, as the membership in a specific ethnic group tends to give people a sense of belonging. It tends to impact individuals´ worldviews, the way of thinking, perceptions, feelings, and behaviors (Phinney, 1996) and consequently may influence how individuals interact with others and how they view themselves.

There is some evidence that identity exploration and the development of ethnic identity may have benefits, while identity denial may have a negative impact (Yip, 2013). Identity exploration refers to the active exploration of one´s group membership, whereas identity denial refers to the refusal of one´s group membership. In situations of perceived discrimination, a robust ethnic identity can serve as a protection against the effects of ethno-violence (Ashmore et al., 2004). 

Research on ethnic identity in the U.S. has focused mostly on African Americans, Latin Americans, and Asian Americans (Weisskirch et al., 2016). This may be because race or ethnic identity is believed to be more relevant for visible minorities than for White Americans (Syed & Azmitia, 2009). In the U.S., the term “minority” defines individuals who, due to their group membership, physical traits, cultural, or religious traditions tend to be singled out by society (Wirth, 1945, as cited in Ponterotto, Utsey, & Pedersen, 2006). These individuals tend to be regarded as different or inferior and, as a result, may face discrimination.

Current theoretical models of ethnic identity suggest that ethnic identity has a significant impact primarily on visible minorities’ psychological well-being and self-esteem (Syed & Juang, 2014). The term “visible minorities” refers to individuals who cannot pass as White in the U.S. This idea is based on the different social and financial status minority groups tend to have in the U.S. compared to the White American majority (Syed & Juang, 2014). Additionally, in the U.S., White identities are presumed to be homogeneous (Sue & Sue, 2008), which has led to deemphasizing the possible impact of ethnic identity for white individuals, including Jews (Weisskirch et al., 2016). There is evidence supporting that ethnic identity tends to be more critical for visible minorities in the U.S. (Brittian et al., 2013; Ruiz, 1990; Syed & Juang, 2014). For instance, Worrel (2007) found that there is a relationship between ethnic identity and selfesteem for ethnic minorities, but not for White individuals. According to existing findings, having a strong ethnic identity and endorsing a specific group membership tends to serve as a buffer against possible adverse psychological consequences of discrimination for visible minorities (Ashmore et al., 2004; Fernando, 2012). A strong ethnic identity may also promote well-being and boost self-esteem (Weisskirch et al., 2016).

However, a few studies have found that ethnic identity is also significant for White individuals (Syed & Juang, 2014). Fuligni, Witkow, and Garcia (2005) provided evidence that ethnic identity was significant for students of all backgrounds. In general, students who reported a strong ethnic identity also reported a better academic adjustment in college, independent of their ethnicity. Similarly, Schwartz, Zamboanga, Weisskirch, and Rodriguez (2009) and Syed and Azmitia (2009) reported that while some differences in levels of ethnic identity exist among college students from diverse populations compared to White American students, ethnic identity development was significant for all ethnic groups. At this time, it seems unclear to what extent ethnic identity plays a role in the lives of individuals who are White as there are studies that contradict each other. This seems especially true for ethnic groups such as the Jewish community whose culture, language, religious practice, and history are distinct from other White ethnicities.

Ethnic identity can be a resource to cope with discrimination. However, it can also exacerbate already stressful situations. Consequently, counselor educators and professional counselors need to be prepared to address issues around ethnic identity with all of their clients, including Jewish clients. Moreover, when working with individuals who de-emphasize or deny their ethnic identity, being reminded of their group membership tends to impact their mental health negatively (Yip, 2013). Thus, professional counselors may want to explore the meaning and importance ethnic identity plays in their clients´ lives to assess clients’ existing strengths or to assist them in integrating their ethnic identity in a more empowering manner. At the same time, it is important that professional counselors do not assume that all Jewish clients may want to explore their Jewish identity in counseling sessions. 

#### Jewish Identity: An Ethno-Religious Identity
Ethnic identity is a complex and multifaceted construct. Jewish identity is no exception, mainly because Jewish identity is not just an ethnic identity, but an ethno-religious identity (Friedlander et al., 2010; Macdonald-Dennis, 2006). Many researchers (Altman et al., 2010; Dubow, Pargament, Boxer, & Tarakeshwar, 2000; Friedman, Friedlander, & Blustein, 2005; Glicksman & Korpeckyj-Cox, 2009; Langman, 1999; Weisskirch, Kim, Schwartz, & Whitbourne, 2016) share this view and define Jewish identity as a combination of ethnicity and religion. “The two components are, however, so intertwined that they cannot be isolated without disturbing their essential character and distorting the nature of the Jewish identity” (Herman, 1989, p. 37). Unfortunately, there appears to be a tendency in the U.S. to describe Jewish identities merely as a religious identity (e.g., hate crimes against Jews are listed under religious hate crimes by the FBI, even in cases where the hate crime is of an ethnic nature, such as painting a Swastika). However, according to Herman (1989), Jewish identity is not analogous to Christian identities, and Judaism is not another religion equivalent to Christianity. “Faith and belief play a much larger role in Christian identity than in Judaism” (Hartman & Kaufman, 2006, p. 371).

The reason why faith is essential in Christianity is because Christianity is an assent religion (Morris, 1997). In other words, individuals of the Christian faith are members because they agree with the religious tenets of their faith. Judaism, on the other hand, is a descent religion (Morris, 1997). The membership is determined by the ethnic identity and shared cultural practices (Morris, 1997). Herman (1989) contended that in the U.S., historically ethnic differences tended to be discouraged while religious differences were perceived as being acceptable. The expectation, especially for White immigrants, has been to assimilate and to leave behind their ethnic identity at their arrival in the U.S. (Ponterotto et al., 2006). The view of Judaism and thus of Jewish identity as a religious experience only is a sign of White American culture (Herman, 1989). This is noteworthy as other White identities (e.g., German, French, Swedish) are usually not a combination of ethnic and religious components. The various European ethnic identities tend to be based solely on ethnicity and culture. The religious identity tends to be separate from the ethnic identity.

Friedlander et al. (2010) found that Jewish identity is comprised of ethnic and religious aspects. They reported that ethnic and religious identity are two separate constructs that tend to be intertwined for Jews (Friedlander et al., 2010). The emphasis on religious and ethnic aspects may differ from person to person (Friedlander et al., 2010). Herman (1989) proposed that Jewish identity is constructed on a continuum. Jews can pick from a spectrum of religious or cultural aspects to express their Jewish identity (Hartman & Kaufman, 2006). At one end of the continuum is the assimilated Jew who avoids any connection with other Jews, does not observe religious aspects and views the Jewish people just as a religious group; at the other end is the observant Orthodox Jew who is a Zionist (person who believes that Jews should have a right to self-determination in their own country; Herman, 1989). Friedman, Friedlander, and Blustein (2005) contended that Jewish identity does not need to be based on religious beliefs and practices. Affiliation with one of the major denominations (Reform, Conservative, Orthodox) or membership at a synagogue is also not necessary for the development of a strong Jewish identity (Rosen & Weltman, 1996). Some Jews may choose to avoid any connection to Judaism while other Jews may decide to live an observant lifestyle (Hartman & Kaufman, 2006). Overall, Jews in the U.S. tend to identify as Jewish more strongly based on ethnicity and to a lesser extent on religion (Friedlander et al., 2010). Individuals who are affiliated with one of the Jewish movements tended to have a clearer idea of what their Jewish identity means to them compared to unaffiliated Jews (Friedman et al., 2005). Thus, significant differences within Jewish identities and between other White identities exist and need to be considered when studying Jewish identity or when applying findings of White ethnic identities to the Jewish population. More research is needed to get a better understanding to what extent religious, cultural, and denominational aspects impact the development of a Jewish identity.

#### Ethnic Identity
Research related to ethnic identity has focused primarily on visible minorities. There are only a few studies (e.g., Kahn & Aronson, 2012; Ponterotto, Utsey, Stracuzzi, & Saya, 2003; Weisskirch et al., 2016) that have focused on the impact that ethnic identity development may have on “invisible” minority groups, such as the Jewish community. Based on those few studies, it appears that ethnic identity may impact Jews differently than other ethnic groups, including White Americans. Ponterotto et al. (2003) found significant differences related to ethnic identity within White ethnicities (e.g., Jewish, Italian, and Irish). Irish Americans scored the lowest on ethnic identity; Jewish Americans scored the highest on ethnic identity (Ponterotto et al., 2003). Additionally, Kahn and Aronson (2012) found that Jews and African Americans exhibited similar patterns of ethnic identity and centrality. More specifically, the identity profiles of Jewish participants revealed that Jewish identity tended to be viewed as important (high centrality) and that like African Americans, Jewish participants perceived their ethnic group as being viewed unfavorably by non-Jews (low public regard; Kahn & Aronson, 2012). More recently, Weisskirch et al. (2016) provided further evidence that substantial differences exist among Jews, visible minorities, and the White majority. For instance, American Jews scored higher on ethnic identity than other White Americans; however, their scores were not as high as those of African Americans, but higher than those of Asian Americans (Weisskirch et al., 2016).

Other researchers (e.g., Syed & Juang, 2014; Weisskirch et al., 2016) have reported that there seems to be a relationship between perceived discrimination and depressive symptoms for ethnic minorities. What distinguishes the study by Weisskirch et al. (2016) is the inclusion of Jews as a minority. Weisskirch et al. (2016) suggest that there is a relationship between perceived discrimination and depressive symptoms for Jews, and that ethnic identity appears to moderate this relationship. However, for the Jewish participants, a strong Jewish identity seemed to strengthen the relationship between depressive symptoms and exposure to discrimination, while for other ethnic minorities the reverse appeared to be true (Weisskirch et al., 2016). Therefore, more research on Jewish identity and its relationship to antisemitism may be necessary to better understand this difference between Jewish identity and other minority identities.

Fernando (2012) and Dubow et al. (2000), on the other hand, reported that for Jews, ethnic identity appears to function as a buffer against antisemitism and is, therefore, important for their psychological well-being. Dubow et al. (2000) suggested that ethnic identity might be a valuable coping resource for Jews. Fernando (1975, as cited in Fernando, 2012) found evidence that a strong Jewish identity served as a protective psychological factor for depression and that ethnic identity did not have the same protective impact for depression on individuals who were not exposed to racism. This may mean that ethnic identity becomes more salient for individuals who experience some form of oppression due to their cultural background. Consequently, Jewish individuals who experience antisemitism may report a stronger Jewish identity and may view their ethno-religious identity as more relevant than individuals who have not been exposed to antisemitism. Therefore, more research will be necessary to find out if there is a relationship between Jewish identity and exposure to antisemitism.

It appears that Jews retain their ethnic distinction despite having the ability to blend in with the White majority (Weisskirch et al., 2016). This is also in line with Langman's (1999) research, who reported that Jews tend to think of themselves as Jews and not necessarily as part of the White American majority. Midlarsky, Pirutinsky, and Cohen (2012) found that attitudes towards psychotherapy provided evidence that there are significant differences between White Americans and American Jews, which led them to conclude there is a need for greater cultural differentiation. Midlarsky et al. (2012) further suggested that previous differences in helpseeking attitudes of White and Black Americans reported by researchers may be partial because Jewish individuals were included in the White sample. Consequently, ethnic identity seems to play a vital role also for individuals or groups who can pass as White, such as the Jewish community. At the same time, maybe because of their unique position (being able to pass as White while being a distinct minority facing discrimination), Jewish identity is not only different from other White American identities, but also different compared to visible minorities in the U.S. and seems to impact the perceived health of Jews (Pearson & Geronimus, 2011). Fernando (2012), Midlarsky et al. (2012), and Weisskirch et al. (2016) suggested that a closer look at Jewish identity and the impact of discrimination is necessary.

Having a closer look at Jewish identity seems to be especially indicated when considering the historical context and the status of Jews throughout European history. After all, “similarity of skin color does not equal similarity of cultures” (Langman, 1998, p. 207). Not addressing culture and context of a construct such as ethnic identity is problematic, as it may lead to overlooking significant aspects that impact ethnic identity development (Galliher et al., 2017). Moreover, as seen in the case of Jewish identity, it leads to overlooking meaningful differences between ethnic groups and does not allow one to fully understand Jewish identity and how experiences with antisemitism impact it.

### Jewish Denominations
There are many different ways Jewish individuals may express their Jewish identity. One way is through membership with a synagogue and affiliation with a particular stream of Judaism. In the U.S., there are three major Jewish denominations: Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform. In chapter one, I presented these three based on their level of religious observance, from most observant (Orthodox) to least observant (Reform). In this section, I will present the denominations based on their time of development and their historical roots to orient the reader to understand how the different streams have influenced each other. Thus, the order in which I will describe the beginnings of the movements will be: 1) Reform Judaism, 2) Orthodox Judaism, and 3) Conservative Judaism.

Throughout most of European history, the Jewish population was viewed as separate and foreign (Langman, 1998). Jews tended to live in ghettos, did not have citizenship in their country of residence, and faced political and societal restrictions (Blau, 1966). This changed in 1791, after the French Revolution when Jews living in France were granted full citizenship for the first time. By the end of the 1870s, Jews living in countries such as Germany and the Netherlands received full citizenship and were no longer limited in their occupational choices nor were they bound to live in specific quarters (Blau, 1966). This newly found freedom and the overall secularization during the enlightenment also impacted Jewish life and religious practices. One aspect that made it possible for Judaism and the Jewish people to survive without a homeland was the unity of the Jewish people due to their limited opportunities in Europe. When these limitations fell away, Jews sought out new ways to retain their Jewish identity. According to Blau (1966), the Jews in Europe dealt with this issue through the development of new religious philosophies and changes in practice. The development of the Reform, Orthodox, and Conservative movements, therefore, need to be understood as a reaction to the political and social changes in Europe and the U.S. in the past. However, it is important to note that these movements are all part of one Judaism, unlike Catholicism or Protestantism, which are separate forms of Christianity (Blau, 1966).

#### Reform Judaism
The secularization of the European societies during the period of enlightenment, as well as the emancipation of the Jews, had a profound impact on Jewish life. As a result, some Jews attempted to Europeanize the synagogue services by reducing Middle Eastern influences, the length of services, introducing new music and choral singing accompanied by an organ, and conducting services in the local language (Blau, 1966). Men and women were now allowed to sit together during services. Rituals and practices that appeared to conflict with rationalist thinking were eliminated. According to Popkin (2015), in the past, the Reform movement´s goal was to modernize Judaism to support acculturation and full integration of Jews into the nonJewish society. Reform Judaism introduced a new view on Jewish identity by shifting it from a national and religious identity to a primarily religious identity (Philipson, 1907). Jewish immigrants from Europe have influenced the Reform movement in the U.S. In the 1850s, rabbis from Germany led many synagogues in the U.S. (Blau, 1966). However, this is no longer the case. The Reform movement in the U.S. is now more developed than in other Western European countries, including Germany (Blau, 1966; Haaretz, 2013). Today, Reform Judaism has re-introduced some of the traditional elements. For example, while the movement as a whole continues not to follow kashrut (following kosher dietary laws), more and more members have returned to keeping kosher, and many synagogues have increased the use of Hebrew during services (Langman, 1999).

#### Orthodox Judaism
The label “Orthodox” was first introduced in Germany (Blau, 1966). The term was used to distinguish more observant forms of Judaism from Reform Judaism (Langman, 1999). However, it is important to recognize that today´s Orthodox Judaism evolved due to its reaction to the changes suggested and implemented by Reform Judaism (Blau, 1966). Orthodox Judaism is an umbrella term for the more traditional expressions of Judaism (Popkin, 2015) and started with the goal to offset the changes introduced by the Reform movement in Germany and other countries in Europe (Blau, 1966). The Orthodox movement in the U.S. started similarly to the Orthodox movement in Germany. The intent was to counteract the changes introduced by the Reform movement. However, while immigrants from Germany profoundly influenced the Reform movement, the Orthodox movement has been affected by immigrants predominantly from Eastern European countries who tended to be Hasidic (a subgroup of ultra-Orthodox Judaism) and thus stricter in their observance of traditional values and rituals (Blau, 1966).

Today, Orthodox groups tend to adhere strictly to halakhah, meaning that they keep kosher and observe Shabbat. Their view of Judaism is that it is more than just a religion as it encompasses all aspects of life, such as family and business practices. Services in Orthodox synagogues are held entirely in Hebrew, women and men are seated separately, and women do not actively participate in religious services. Gender roles within the Orthodox communities tend to be clearly defined and carry great importance not just in religious settings but also in daily life. The ancient traditions, rituals, and laws continue to be the primary influence in addressing modern life. Jewish men and women who fall under the Orthodox spectrum tend to be readily identifiable from non-Jews due to their clothing (kippah [skullcap], black hat, and tzizit for men; modest dresses or skirts that are at least knee length and tops that cover the elbows and collarbones for women) and in some cases due to their hairstyle (payot for men and a scheitel [wig] or a tichel [head scarf] for married women; Schlosser, 2006). However, not all men who wear a kippah are necessarily Orthodox Jews. Some men in the Conservative movement wear a kippah, and while most Reform Jews usually do not wear kippot unless they are participating in religious services, there are some who similar to Orthodox and Conservative men wear them daily.

#### Conservative Judaism
Conservative Judaism can be seen as a reaction to both Reform and Orthodox Judaism and began in the U.S. in the 19th century. The idea behind Conservative Judaism was to preserve traditional Judaism while allowing modernization (Langman, 1999). The goal was to mediate between the extreme positions of Reform and Orthodox Judaism and to unify all Jews (Blau, 1966). However, the differences between the movements could not be bridged, and consequently, Conservative Judaism emerged as a third force (Blau, 1966). What set Conservative Judaism apart from both the Reform and Orthodox movements was the emphasis on Jews as a nation. One of the goals of the movement was to strengthen Jewish education including learning Hebrew and maintaining and deepening the connection with Israel (Blau, 1966). Members of the Conservative movement tend to follow halakhah (Jewish law). However, they also embrace secular education. Conservative Jews tend to keep kosher and keep Shabbat. Services in Conservative synagogues are usually in Hebrew, similar to an Orthodox shul (Orthodox Jews tend to use the Yiddish term for synagogue). However, men and women are seated together during services, which the Conservative movement has in common with the Reform movement. Similar to the Orthodox movement Conservative Judaism recognizes only children of matrilineal descent as Jewish while Reform Judaism acknowledges patrilineal Jewish descent as well (Popkin, 2015). In general, Conservative Judaism tends to take the middle position between Orthodox and Reform Judaism. It neither strictly holds the traditional views and practices like Orthodoxy nor does it have greater flexibility in observing halakhah like the Reform movement. Instead, Conservative Judaism allows changes based on a reinterpretation of halakhah that is more consistent with today's situation and living conditions of Jews in the U.S. (Langman, 1999).

#### Jewish Religious Denominations and Identity
The development of a Jewish identity and its importance is different for each Jew. Its strength depends on both cultural and religious aspects (Friedman et al., 2005). One of these aspects is Jewish denomination. Reform, Conservative, and Orthodox Judaism are three of the main movements in the U.S. that distinguish themselves from each other in the interpretation of the scriptures as well as the observance of daily religious rituals and cultural practices. Some researchers have looked at the relationship between the denomination and Jewish identity and have found significant differences between members of these three groups concerning the strengths of Jewish identity. According to Friedlander et al. (2010), the differences of strengths of Jewish identity are related to the religious affiliation of the individual Jew. Orthodox Jews scored significantly higher on a measure of Jewish identity compared to all other denominations (Friedlander et al., 2010). Conservative Jews scored higher on Jewish identity than Reform Jews, and Reform Jews tended to score higher on Jewish identity than unaffiliated Jews (Friedlander et al., 2010). Friedman et al. (2005) also noted similar differences related to the strengths of an American identity versus Jewish identity in the Jewish community. It appears that the stronger the Jewish identity is, the more likely individuals view themselves as bicultural (Friedman et al., 2005). Additionally, they found that for Orthodox Jews, Jewish identity appeared to be more relevant than American identity, while for non-affiliated or secular Jews the opposite was true (Friedman et al., 2005).

Differences in observance among Jews also played a role for some Jewish individuals (Altman et al., 2010). There is evidence that Conservative participants tended to feel judged by more observant Jews (Orthodox Jews) while at the same time feeling frustrated with less observant or less knowledgeable individuals (Altman et al., 2010). It appears that the membership or lack of membership in one of the major denominations not only influences the strengths of identity but also how Jews feel when interacting with Jews of a different denomination and level of observance. 

Denomination also appears to influence how Jews cope with struggles connected to spirituality. It appears that spiritual struggles relate to lower levels of health and higher levels of anxiety for many religious groups (Krumrei, Pirutinsky, & Rosmarin, 2013). However, Orthodox Jews or more observant Jews are impacted by spiritual struggles to a lesser degree than Reform or Conservative Jews or Christians, Muslims, and Hindus (Rosmarin, Pargament, & Flannelly, 2009). More specifically, “at the highest levels of spiritual struggle, measures of physical and mental health increased among Orthodox Jews, whereas they continued to decrease among non-Orthodox Jews” (Rosmarin et al., 2009, p. 254). This follows that concluding how religion and spirituality relate to health in one religious group based on a study with another is problematic (Rosmarin et al., 2009). Even within Judaism, there seem to be significant differences that need to be considered (Krumrei et al., 2013). This is also in line with Rosmarin, Pirutinsky, Pargament, and Krumrei's (2009) finding that trust in G-d positively influences the level of health for Orthodox Jews, but not for Reform or Conservative Jews. Krumrei et al. (2013) did not find evidence that significant differences between Orthodox and non-Orthodox Jews exist regarding spirituality, depression, and overall health. It seems that more research is warranted to further explore the differences between Reform, Conservative, and Orthodox Jews related to spirituality and religious identity.

Besides the differences among the Jewish denominations related to spirituality and overall health, there is some evidence that the Orthodox community, like other minority groups and unlike non-Orthodox Jews, tends to underutilize mental health services (Langman, 1997; Milevsky & Eisenberg, 2012). In general, the Jewish population appears to display different mental health-seeking attitudes and more openness towards the utilization of psychotherapy than African Americans and White Americans (Midlarsky et al., 2012). This may be because psychotherapy grew out of Jewish culture and thus is more compatible with psychotherapy than any other culture (Langman, 1997). According to Langman (1997), it is no coincidence that nearly all early members of psychoanalysis were Jewish. Nonetheless, Orthodox Jews tend to view mental health professionals with suspicion (Milevsky & Eisenberg, 2012). According to Milevsky and Eisenberg (2012) there are many reasons for this suspicion: Orthodox Jews may fear that their values and religious beliefs will not be respected (Milevsky & Eisenberg, 2012). Orthodox communities tend to stigmatize individuals who are receiving mental health counseling services, which in turn could impact the individual’s opportunities to find a marriage partner (Milevsky & Eisenberg, 2012). The Orthodox community tends to be close-knit, which makes it difficult to keep the usage of mental health services a secret (Milevsky & Eisenberg, 2012). Some Orthodox Jews, especially those with a strong commitment to religious practices, tend to be suspicious of outsiders due to centuries of persecution and pogroms (Schnall, 2006). Concerns about interactions with members of the opposite sex, which tends to be prohibited in many Orthodox traditions, may be another reason to avoid seeking professional help (Schnall, 2006). Additionally, Orthodox Jews tend to seek out the support of a rabbi when experiencing social or emotional struggles (Schnall, 2006). Thus, while there is an excellent chance that Jewish individuals will seek counseling services to cope with mental health issues, professional counselors, as well as counselor educators, need to keep in mind that differences between Reform, Conservative, and Orthodox Jews exist that may need to be addressed in counseling sessions.

### Antisemitism
In addition to the differences between the Jewish movements, professional counselors also need to keep in mind that there are many different ways in which individuals with prejudice towards Jews may express their antisemitic beliefs or feelings. This is partially due to the long history of hatred towards Jews, as well as societal changes that have impacted conceptualizations of discrimination (religious, ethnic, political) and its societal acceptance (Wistrich, 1991). In this section, I will briefly discuss the origin and meaning of the term antisemitism. This section will then continue with a description of the different types of antisemitism and an overview of the history of the persecution of Jews. I then will provide current definitions of antisemitism and end the section with information regarding current antisemitic hate crime statistics.

#### Contemporary Antisemitism and Anti-Zionism
According to Wistrich (1991, 2013), Joseph Marr coined the term *antisemitism* with the intention to replace the unscientific sounding word Judenhaß (hatred of Jews) with a more scientific name. With the beginning of the enlightenment in Europe in the 18th century, religious discrimination started to be considered old-fashioned and backward (Wistrich, 1991). Thus, a new term was needed, a term that would allow describing the non-religious hatred of Jews in a more sophisticated manner.

> It was racial rather than religious – Semites being a 19th- century classification for the people from the Middle East – and therefore more respectable to many contemporaries. It often went together with the emphasis on the “Aryan” (Nordic/Germanic) character and alleged superiority of European civilization (Wistrich, 2013, p. 31).

According to Wistrich (1991), however, the term antisemitism is somewhat problematic and illogical. The word “Semite” refers to Jews and Arabs, but the term antisemitism does not describe the hatred of both Jews and Arabs, as one would expect — only the hatred of Jews. Wistrich (1991) further contended that the term distinguishes Jews from the majority of nonJews. Simply put, it replaced the original religious distinction between Christians and Jews with a new distinction based on race.

Today, the term antisemitism is used to describe a variety of antisemitic expressions and behaviors. According to Marcus (2015), the way antisemitism is expressed depends on the needs of the individual. Antisemitism is sometimes defined as racial prejudice, religious bigotry, or ethnic bias. Beck (1989) divided antisemitism into seven different forms: 1) Religious, 2) Social, 3) Political, 4) Economic, 5) Psychological, 6) Sexual, and 7) Racial. Religious antisemitism refers to Christian beliefs and attitudes towards Jews such as denouncing Jews as “Christ-killers” (Langman, 1999). Examples of social antisemitism are occupational restrictions Jews faced throughout their history or quotas imposed by colleges to limit Jews from getting into college programs. Beck (1989) defined political antisemitism as blaming Jews for Communism or Capitalism, while economic antisemitism refers to ideas that Jews control the banks and that Jews are money-grubbing penny-pinchers. Psychological antisemitism refers to Jews being used as placeholders for the fears of non-Jews. Jews can be denounced for assimilating and leaving their culture behind and at the same time for wanting to take over the world. One example of sexual antisemitism is the idea of the Jewish American Princess (JAP), which suggests that Jewish women are spoiled and demanding (Langman, 1999). Racial antisemitism describes Jews as a separate, inferior race. These examples show the full range of beliefs, attitudes, and conspiracy theories Jews had to endure at different times in their history.

#### History of Antisemitism
The beginning of antisemitism can be traced back to pre-Christian times. During the Hellenistic period (323 BCE – 31 CE), the Jewish people were a minority in a pagan world (Wistrich, 1991). Their monotheistic belief system, their dietary laws, and the observance of Shabbat set the Jewish people apart from the pagan majority. Overall, attacks against Jews were sporadic during the Hellenistic period. However, this changed with the establishment of Christianity (Mohl, 2011).

To understand Christianity´s role in the defamation of the Jewish people and Judaism, it is necessary to briefly introduce the roots of Christianity. Christianity developed out of Judaism. The first “Christians” were not Christians, but Jews. They followed the same laws and rituals as the broader Jewish community. The only aspect that distinguished these Jews from the community was their membership in a Jewish sect (Mohl, 2011). According to Wistrich (1991), it is due to this early connection that the negation of Judaism became a central motif in Christianity. The repudiation of Judaism was a vital aspect in the formation of a Christian identity, as was the belief that Christianity supersedes Judaism (Wistrich, 1991). In other words, the Christian communities thought that Judaism was no longer needed as the Christian tenets replaced the older Jewish belief system.

During the early centuries (33-324 CE) of Christianity, the denunciation of the Jewish people focused on their treatment of Jesus (Langman, 1999). Christians accused Jews of the murder of their Christian god (Langman, 1999; Mohl, 2011). The stereotype of Jews as Christkillers and worshippers of the devil continued to be reinforced during the period of the Crusades (1095 – 1291 CE), where Jews were massacred because of the existing stereotypes (Langman, 1999; Mohl, 2011). As Christianity continued to develop and spread throughout Europe new accusations against the Jews were added. By the 12th century, the Jewish people were believed to poison wells, to have special powers, and to commit ritual murders (Mohl, 2011; Wistrich, 1991). During the middle ages (476 – 1492 CE), Christians accused Jews of the Black Death, and it was believed that Jews intended to destroy Christianity and thus all Christians (Langman, 1999). According to Mohl (2011), this led to drastic measures against the Jewish communities. Jews were segregated and were forced to live in ghettos. They were excluded from some professions (agriculture and commerce) and were pushed to occupations such as collecting taxes and money lending (Mohl, 2011). This is how the new stereotype of Jews as greedy moneylenders was formed as well as the Jewish plot for world domination (Langman, 1999; Mohl, 2011).

The Reformation (1517 – 1648 CE) did not bring about new stereotypes. However, it reinforced the existing stereotypes. When Martin Luther proposed his 95 theses, he expected that Jews would follow his movement and convert. When this did not happen, he reacted with rage and encouraged Protestants (members of his movement) to use violence against Jews (e.g., burn down their synagogues, physical assaults; Langman, 1999). Martin Luther and the Reformation played an active part in intensifying the already existing negative attitudes towards Jews.

With the beginning of the period of Enlightenment (1685-1815 CE), the expression of anti-Jewish attitudes changed. For the first time, Jews were emancipated and were able to move out of ghettos, freely choose their profession, and participated on a political level (Langman, 1999). As the importance of religion waned, the focus on religiously motivated antisemitism diminished as well (Langman, 1999). Enlightened Europeans no longer believed in the idea of salvation, which had made the conversion of Jews a critical aspect of the Christian belief system (Wistrich, 1991). Christian institutions gave Jews who converted to Christianity a way out, as their conversion, in the eyes of the church, meant their salvation (Wistrich, 1991). With the Enlightenment and the secularization of Europe, more and more intellectuals rejected Christianity, but they retained the Christian dislike of Judaism (Langman, 1999). Enlightened Europeans did not want to be viewed as “backward Jew-haters” who were influenced by prescientific religious beliefs, and thus a new term was needed. The pseudo-scientific term antisemitism provided cover for their resentments towards Jews. Consequently, religious prejudice turned into racial prejudice (Wistrich, 2013). According to Wistrich (2013), redefining Jews as a race allowed non-Jews to characterize the Jewish community in negative terms, without the need to reference religion, while at the same time, sounding more scientific.

> The Nazis took over all the negative anti-Jewish stereotypes in Christianity but removed the escape clause. There was no longer any way in which even fully assimilated or baptized Jews could flee from the sentence of death which had been passed by inexorable laws of race (Wistrich, 1991, p. xxii).

Under the Nazi regime (1933-1945 CE), the Jews lost their rights as citizens. The Nuremberg Laws from 1935 outlawed marriages between Germans and Jews to protect the purity of German blood. In Hitler´s view, Jews were dangerous for multiple reasons: Jews were regarded as alien to Germany, they were regarded as racially inferior, while at the same time having the intelligence to plot against the Germans, and possibly overthrow the Nazi regime (Mohl, 2011). Bronner (2000) contended that Jews were seen as pulling strings and dominating society in the background and, therefore, being responsible for any catastrophe. Jews were hated for keeping to themselves and following their religious tradition while being met with suspicion because of their involvement in society (Bronner, 2000). According to Langman (1999), this led to a paradoxical twist in which Jews were being accused of both being "clannish and sticking together as well as being intrusive, eager to assimilate" (p. 110). For the Nazis, the only solution to this dilemma was the Endlösung (final solution), which culminated in the Shoah (Hebrew term for the massacre of Jews during Nazi Germany), the murder of 6,000,000 Jews.

Although most historic tragedies, such as pogroms and expulsions, may have taken place in Europe and the Mediterranean area, antisemitism has been an issue also in the U.S. According to Wertheimer (1995), the expression of antisemitism in the U.S. differed from its counterpart in Europe. The first settlers (1607 CE) brought their beliefs and prejudice about Jews with them when they arrived in the new world. Discriminatory laws that would make it illegal for Jews to own land or carry guns were not unusual. In some of the colonies, Jews did not have voting rights and were not allowed to practice law (Langman, 1999). Wertheimer (1995) further contended that Jews were not allowed to worship in public; however, the hostility towards Jews was moderated by the lack of clear laws in the American colonies. Additionally, the existence of other minorities that were more despised, as well as the presence of a variety of nations and people with different religious backgrounds, tempered antisemitism (Wertheimer, 1995). According to Winston (1998), antisemitism was widespread in the U.S. in the early 1900s. This is also in line with Wertheimer (1995), who stated that most historians place the eruption of Jewhatred in the American post-Civil War era. Discriminatory hiring and rental practices were not uncommon during this period.

Antisemitism continued to rise in the 1930s and during World War II (Winston, 1998). Jews were banned from certain neighborhoods, and universities had quotas in place that limited the enrollment of Jewish students (Langman, 1999). While Jews in the U.S. (Wertheimer, 1995) were not massacred like in Europe, physical assaults on Jews did exist (Langman, 1999). The lynching of Leo Frank in 1915 is one of the better-known examples. Jews experienced physical attacks also in the 1930s to the 1960s as well as vandalism of synagogues (Langman, 1999).

#### Antisemitism Today
Available hate crime statistics suggest that antisemitism continues to be an issue in the U.S. Hate crime statistics presented by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015) show that Jews have been and continue to be one of the most targeted communities in the U.S. Hate crime incidents against the Jewish community have ranged from physical assaults to vandalism to attacks on Jewish institutions (FBI, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015). Current statistics show that antisemitic incidents have continued to rise from 1,267 in 2016 to 1,986 in 2017; this number represents a 57% increase (ADL, 2018). College campuses and K-12 schools also have reported an increase in antisemitic incidents. According to the ADL (2018), incidences in educational settings have nearly doubled from 2016 to 2017.

Based on the available data, it is safe to say that antisemitism is a serious issue in the U.S., especially when considering that hate crimes of any type are generally underreported (ADL, 2016). What we still do not know, however, is the motivation for antisemitic hate crimes (religious, ethnic, or political reasons). We also do not know if and how Jews have been impacted by the increase of incidents and what their thoughts and experiences have been. More research will be necessary to get a better understanding of the relationship between antisemitic incidents and Jewish identity. Studying the relationship between antisemitism and Jewish identity will give professional counselors a better understanding of how antisemitism impacts Jewish individuals and will allow them to offer Jewish clients culturally sensitive and appropriate services.

#### Anti-Zionism
In the past, antisemitism has been defined primarily as prejudice towards Jews based on religious and ethnic aspects (Wistrich, 2013). However, since the re-creation of Israel in 1948, antisemitism has also been expressed through anti-Zionism, denying Israel´s right to exist (Judaken, 2008).

Zionism is often described as an effort of national self-liberation of the Jewish people (Herman, 1989). However, according to Herman (1989), Zionism is more than the affirmation of Jewish peoplehood. It encompasses the dream of returning “to live as a free people in the Land of Zion, and in Jerusalem” (Zafer-Smith, 2003, p. 110). “The essence of the Zionist credo is that Jews themselves can and should control their destiny” (Herman, 1989, p. 125). In other words, Zionism is the idea that Jews, like other nations, should have the right to self-determination in their own country.

Anti-Zionism refers to the hostility towards a Jewish national identity by focusing on Israel and is a form of antisemitism (Zafer-Smith, 2003). The European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (2017) defined anti-Zionism as a form of antisemitism based on the following examples: 1) it denies the Jewish people their right to self-determination, 2) it applies double standards on Israel, which are not requested from any other state, 3) it uses images or symbols associated with classic antisemitism (blood libel), 4) it compares Israeli policies with Nazi policies, and 5) it claims that Jews are collectively responsible for the policies and actions of the State of Israel. Thus, anti-Zionism can be distinguished from legitimate criticism of Israel.

Anti-Zionism is not a new phenomenon. Judaken (2008) argued that many of the following examples reach back to the Shoah if not beyond: Holocaust denial, antisemitism on the extreme left, antisemitism in the Islamic world, as well as anti-Zionism as antisemitism, including anti-racism as antisemitism. Even international organizations such as the United Nations (UN) have displayed anti-Zionist/antisemitic tendencies (Judaken, 2008; Zafer-Smith, 2003). For instance, in 1976 the UN condemned Zionism as racism. The UN resolution reinterpreted and treated Zionism as if it was a synonym for Nazism, racism, and colonialism (Judaken, 2008). It took the UN 15 years to rescind this resolution (Zafer-Smith, 2003). Another example of anti-Zionism and anti-racism as antisemitism is the boycott, divestment, and sanctions (BDS) campaign. The BDS movement is an organized effort to disrupt Israel´s economy and seeks to harm individuals or companies that trade with or in Israel (Goldfeder, 2018). The movement tends to target Jews or Jewish businesses and has been related to the recent resurgence of antisemitism (Goldfeder, 2018). According to Sheskin and Felson (2016), BDS has supported the introduction of language equating Zionism with racism, while at the same time opposing the definition of antisemitism as a form of racism.

Weinstein and Jackson (2010) suggested that to many it is socially acceptable to express antisemitic feelings by targeting Israel. This does not mean that religiously and racially based hatred of Jews no longer exists as evidenced by the neo-Nazi march in Charlottesville, Virginia in 2017, the shooting at a synagogue in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in 2018 and the shooting at a kosher supermarket in Jersey City, New Jersey in 2019. It just may show that in today´s society, displaying open prejudice based on ethnicity or religion is viewed as objectionable (Wasserstein, 2015), while anti-Israeli sentiments can be masked as anti-racist, and thus appear to be more acceptable (Judaken, 2008; Rossman-Benjamin, 2012).

Kaplan and Small (2006) provided some evidence that anti-Israeli sentiments predict antisemitic prejudice in individuals. It appears that the stronger the anti-Israeli attitudes are, the more likely it is that an individual also holds antisemitic beliefs (Kaplan & Small, 2006). This is also in line with Weinstein and Jackson (2010) who contended that anti-Zionist attitudes and antisemitism on college campuses are significantly correlated. Similarly, Cohen, Jussim, Harber, and Bhasin (2009) found that there seems to be a connection between antisemitism and antiIsraeli attitudes. They reported: “Although people can condemn Israeli actions without being antisemitic, our research has shown that hostility toward Israel may serve as a cover for antiSemitism and, at the same time, feed back and strengthen anti-Semitism” (Cohen et al., 2009, p. 304).

More research is necessary to better understand the relationship between antisemitism and anti-Zionism. Specifically, more research is needed to get a better understanding of whether anti-Zionism impacts Jewish individuals, and if so to what extent, compared to religious and ethnic discrimination. Based on my comprehensive review of textbooks it appears that antiZionism is currently not addressed in textbooks related to multiculturalism. In addition, I was not able to find any research exploring or analyzing the impact of anti-Zionism on the overall well-being of Jews. Consequently, counselor educators and professional counselors may not know that anti-Zionism is a form of antisemitism, and thus they may neglect to teach about it in classes or address it in counseling sessions. This may be especially true in cases where counseling professionals hold negative beliefs about Zionism and lack awareness of their bias towards the State of Israel. This lack of awareness may be problematic and could lead to therapeutic issues and inadvertently harm Jewish clients.

### Expressions of Antisemitism
Today antisemitism continues to be a global phenomenon. The expression of hatred against Jews has morphed over the last two thousand years from a religiously, ethnic-based hatred to hostility towards the state of Israel (Wasserstein, 2015). Writings describing the various forms of antisemitism (religious, ethnic, and political) exist. FBI and ADL statistics show the development of antisemitism in the U.S.; however, these statistics do not allow discerning between types of antisemitism, or how Jewish individuals perceive the antisemitic incidents. In the following section I will provide information as to how Jews are impacted by antisemitism.

#### Antisemitism and its Impact on Mental Health
Most research on the effects of racism or ethno-violence focus on the African-American, Asian American, and Latino communities. It is believed that experiences with ethno-violence impact people of color but not White individuals (Nadal, Griffin, Wong, Hamit, & Rasmus, 2014; Phinney, 1996). However, experiences with discrimination because of the minority status are not uncommon for Jews (Friedlander et al., 2010). 

A study by Altman et al. (2010) confirmed that Jews are confronted with discrimination and that many Jews feel like a minority due to marginalization. Participants reported being impacted by microaggressions (stereotypes, devaluing of Jewish issues), anti-Israel demonstrations, and worldwide antisemitism (Altman et al., 2010). Research on antisemitism suggests that at some point in time all Jews experience antisemitism; however, they may not necessarily be aware of it (Gold, 2004; Macdonald-Dennis, 2006). Gold (2004) reported that when asking Jewish women in general about experiences with antisemitism some women were not able to recall any antisemitic incidents in their lives. However, when questions were more specific (e.g., asking about stereotypes or jokes about Jews), it turned out that even women who denied experiences with antisemitism had actually experienced it (Gold, 2004).

According to Beck (1991), Langman (1995), and Macdonald-Dennis (2006), many Jews do not think of their experiences with antisemitism as an issue because non-Jews tend to invalidate the importance of antisemitism. This invalidation is problematic, as research has provided evidence that the psychological impact of antisemitism has a significant negative impact on women´s mental health (Gold, 2004). Results of a study by Gold (2004) about the intersection of sexism and antisemitism indicate that even though Jewish women are exposed more often to sexism than to antisemitism, the latter is more significantly related to depression. This is also in line with research by Loewenthal (2012), who reported that antisemitism is a risk factor for depression in both Jewish men and women. In general, Jews tend to be more vulnerable to mental health issues than people belonging to the majority population due to cultural insensitivity and discrimination by non-Jews (Loewenthal, 2012). Ullmann et al. (2013) came to similar conclusions: they found that third generation Jewish migrants from the postSoviet Union to Germany were more prone to depression, anxiety, and psychosomatic problems than the German control group. According to Herman (1989), it is not possible to understand Jewish identity without considering the impact of the memory of the Shoah. There is evidence that transgenerational passing of psychological trauma as well as current experiences with antisemitism are significant factors that contribute to overall health issues (Ullmann et al., 2013).

The Shoah is not the only historical event that plays a role in the development of a Jewish identity. The establishment of the State of Israel in 1948 is another historical event of importance (Herman, 1989). For many Jews, the connection to Israel is an important aspect of their identity (Friedman et al., 2005; Herman, 1989). Thus, it is not surprising that the resurgence of antisemitism on college campuses related to anti-Zionism needs to be addressed (Marcus, 2007). There is some evidence that many of the antisemitic occurrences on campuses are indeed related to anti-Zionism. Jewish students at a number of American colleges (e.g., San Francisco State University, Columbia University, University of California at Irvine, University of California) have been harassed, intimidated (e.g., “Get out or we will kill you”), and insulted (e.g., “Hitler did not finish the job”) by fellow students and professors (Marcus, 2007, p. 207). Some Jewish students have reported feeling “intellectually and emotionally threatened” and having experienced violence (Rossman-Benjamin, 2012, p. 489). There have been a few cases where Jewish students decided to leave their university because they perceived the campus as a hostile environment (Marcus, 2007). Similar incidents have also occurred on campuses in the United Kingdom (Klaff, 2010). All of those incidents appear to have one factor in common: the perpetrators tended to be pro-Palestinian, anti-Zionists, or part of the BDS movement (Fishman, 2012; Klaff, 2010; Marcus, 2007; Rossman-Benjamin, 2012).

What is concerning is not only the open display of antisemitic behavior and thoughts in the name of social justice by some students and faculty but also the fact that in some cases, complaints by Jewish students were not taken seriously (Rossman-Benjamin, 2012). Antisemitic incidents in recent years have continued to rise in educational settings. According to the ADL, antisemitic incidents in schools and campuses have nearly doubled from 2016 to 2017 (ADL, 2018). The numbers presented by ADL paired with the description of incidents on campuses show that anti-Zionism is a problem and has a negative impact on the well-being of Jewish students. However, the available statistics do not allow understanding to what extent these incidents impact the Jewish community at large. At this point, it is unknown if anti-Zionism is also present in the work environment outside of college campuses. There is no research available that discusses the impact of anti-Zionism on Jewish individuals’ mental health and Jewish identity. Research exploring if antisemitic incidents are based on anti-Zionism, ethnic, or religious bias is also rare. Therefore, more research is necessary to get a better understanding of the prevalence of all forms of antisemitism and their impact on Jewish individuals.

### Multiculturalism in Counseling
The American Counseling Association (ACA) has adopted a code of ethics that states that ethical and professional counselors will provide culturally sensitive and appropriate counseling services to all clients, independent of their ethnicity (ACA, 2014). The ACA *Code of Ethics* states that professional counselors are responsible for “honoring diversity and embracing a multicultural approach,” as well as respecting the “uniqueness of people within their social and cultural context” (ACA, 2014, p. 3). These guidelines are also in line with the Association for Spiritual, Ethical, and Religious Values in Counseling (ASERVIC) competencies and the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP) standards. These guidelines assert that it is the responsibility of professional counselors to have the necessary knowledge and training to work with clients from diverse backgrounds. Counselor educators and professional counselors are required to demonstrate specific competencies, such as addressing issues around oppression and discrimination, which includes issues around antisemitism. Furthermore, professional counselors are expected to offer appropriate multicultural services and are expected to be knowledgeable about within-group differences (ACA, 2014; ASERVC, 2009; CACREP, 2016).

More specifically, counselors need to be aware that the Jewish people are a diverse group with diaspora in Eastern Europe (Ashkenazi Jews), Spain and Portugal (Sephardi Jews), and Northern Africa and Western Asia (Mizrachim; Schlosser, Shapiro Safran, Adisy Suson, Dettle, & Dewey, 2013). According to Herman (1989) and Langman (1995), Jews tend to be impacted by the majority culture in which they live. Thus, Ashkenazi Jews, Sephardi Jews, and Mizrachim who migrated to the U.S. may have slightly different cultural practices and worldviews as they have been influenced by Jewish culture as well as the culture from where they immigrated. It is important that professional counselors are mindful of these differences to avoid making false assumptions about their Jewish clients (e.g., expecting Sephardi Jews to understand Yiddish terms). Moreover, all counselors are required to be able to address religious and spiritual issues in a variety of counseling settings (ACA, 2014; ASERVIC, 2009; CACREP, 2016). Many professional counselors and counselor educators may not be able to meet the required standards and provide culturally sensitive services to Jewish individuals, as there is limited research available on Jewish identity and the impact of antisemitism on Jews. Thus, more research is necessary to gain a better understanding and to provide education on how experiences with antisemitism relate to Jewish identity (religious and ethnic) and Jewish denomination.

#### Multicultural and Social Justice Counseling Competencies
According to Ratts, Singh, Nassar McMillan, Butler, and McCullough (2016), the Multicultural and Social Justice Counseling Competencies (MSJCC) are a multilevel framework that assists professional counselors in implementing multiculturally sensitive counseling services and interventions in their practice. The MSJCC are divided into four developmental domains: 1) counselor self-awareness, 2) client worldview, 3) counseling relationship, and 4) counseling and advocacy interventions. “Moreover, quadrants are used to highlight the intersection of identities and the dynamics of power, privilege, and oppression that influence the counseling relationship” (Ratts, Singh, & Nassar-McMillan, 2015, p. 3). For example, a professional counselor who comes from a privileged status may be working with a client who also comes from a privileged status, or a counselor from a marginalized background could be working with a client from a privileged status. The MSJCC has been endorsed by the ACA, and therefore, all professional counselors, independent of their privileged or marginalized status, are required to develop the necessary self-awareness to explore their worldview, their assumptions, beliefs, values, and biases, as well as the worldview and beliefs of their clients.

Moreover, all counselors are required to have the necessary knowledge and understanding of their social status and their clients' social status (Ratts et al., 2016). Thus, counselors are required to develop resources or techniques that assist them in becoming aware of their own and their clients' biases or values. Counselors need to acquire knowledge that will provide them with a better understanding of how their own and their clients' privileges or marginalization have presented the counselor and the client with advantages or disadvantage in life (Ratts et al., 2016). Additionally, all counselors are required to learn the skills needed to explain how privilege or marginalization impacts their worldview, as well as the worldview of their clients. Lastly, all professional counselors are required to take action by seeking out professional learning opportunities to gain better critical reflection skills to learn more about themselves and their clients (Ratts et al., 2016). Multiculturally competent professional counselors also acknowledge how their worldview and the worldview of their clients impact the counseling relationship and the counseling interventions implemented during a counseling session (Ratts et al., 2016). 

#### The Absence of Jewish Studies in Multicultural Studies
The multicultural counseling competencies have been updated over the years to include not only culturally diverse communities, such as African Americans, Asian Americans, and Latinos, but also other marginalized communities, such as the Lesbian, Gay, Bi-Sexual, and Transgender (LGBT) community. Despite this positive development, it appears that the mental health needs of the Jewish community continue to be overlooked in the multicultural counseling literature. Several researchers (e.g., Langman, 1995; Macdonald-Dennis, 2006; Rubin, 2013, 2017; Schnall, 2006) have discussed the trends over the past two decades by which Jewish issues have been excluded in conversations and teachings about multiculturalism. As a result, many in the counseling field appear to lack awareness about the oppression and discrimination Jews experience (Langman, 1999; Macdonald-Dennis, 2006; Rubin, 2017). This is problematic as research has provided evidence that discrimination and microaggressions have a negative impact on the mental health of minorities (Nadal et al., 2014). The marginalization of Jews continues to be an issue in the U.S. (Kressel & Kressel, 2016; Langman, 1995; Schlosser, 2006). The latest hate crime statistics show that antisemitic incidents have been increasing over the last couple of years (ADL, 2017a; Southern Poverty Law Center, 2017). For instance, 120 Jewish institutions received bomb threats in 2017, which led to the evacuation of buildings (ADL, 2017b). Individuals who were present when the buildings were evacuated may seek counseling to cope with the traumatic experience. They may also prompt individuals to reflect on their Jewish identity and what it means to be a Jew. Similarly, witnesses of the Neo-Nazi rally in Charlottesville, Virginia and other recent incidents may have been impacted negatively by the event and may seek counseling to address the traumatic experience.

The lack of inclusion in the multicultural counseling field may be a sign that professional counselors and counselor educators today continue to be insufficiently educated on antisemitism, Jewish identity, and Jewish diversity, and the relationship between these three factors. Thus, research is necessary to provide counselor educators and professional counselors with more and better information about the oppression of Jews, antisemitism, and Jewish identity and why it is crucial that antisemitism and other Jewish issues need to be included in the multicultural literature.

### Theoretical Framework
As introduced in chapter one, this research study was based on Herman´s theory of Jewish identity as well as existential counseling theory. Herman´s theory focuses on the various factors (e.g., religion, culture, Israel) that impact Jewish identity (Herman, 1989), while existential counseling addresses the difficulties and dilemmas of the human condition (Deurzen, 2002). This section presents the basic tenets of each theory and explains how they were integrated into this study.

#### Existential Counseling
Existential theory, unlike most other counseling theories (e.g., psychoanalysis, personcentered theory), was not founded by one person and is not an independent school of therapy (Corey, 2017). Existential theory is often described as a philosophical approach to counseling as it is heavily influenced by the writings of philosophers such as Søren Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Jean Paul-Sartre, and Martin Buber (Corey, 2017). According to Deurzen (2002), existentialism aims to assist people to come to terms with the "unavoidable paradoxes that life presents and to gain strength from that knowledge" (p. xiv).

According to Yalom (1980), all human beings are confronted with what he calls the four ultimate concerns: 1) freedom, 2) isolation, 3) meaninglessness, and 4) death. Freedom refers to the idea that human beings have a free will and are free to choose among alternatives. Consequently, individuals are responsible for their actions. “Responsibility is inextricably linked to freedom because we are responsible for the sense we make of our world and for all of our actions and our failures to act” (Wedding & Corsini, 2014, p. 267). According to Frankl (1988), human beings are free to make choices even under the most constricting and terrible living conditions. Freedom does not mean that individuals are free from conditions, but that individuals are free to do things even under the worst situations, such as choosing how to face adversity (Frankl, 1988). For Jewish individuals, freedom and responsibility may be related to the ability to choose their religious affiliation and decide to what extent they would like to adhere to religious practices and rituals and interact with other Jews and non-Jews. Freedom and responsibility can also be connected to experiences with any form of antisemitism. Freedom implies that it is up to the individual Jew to decide how to face discrimination and oppression.

*Isolation* refers to experiences of aloneness. “Existential isolation refers to an unbridgeable gulf between oneself and any other being” (Yalom, 1980, p. 355). We experience isolation when we realize that no matter how close we feel to other human beings, in the end, we have to make our own decision, we alone are responsible for finding meaning in life, and we alone can decide how we want to live (Corey, 2017). Encounters with other humans can temper the feeling of loneliness; however, it cannot eradicate it (Yalom, 1980). According to Yalom (1980), isolation cannot be tolerated for long by most individuals. Thus, unconscious defenses are working without respite to deny isolation (Yalom, 1980). Relationships with other human beings like oneself or with a divine being tend to be helpful in buttressing against feelings of isolation (Yalom, 1980). For Jewish clients, isolation may be connected to experiences with antisemitism, as these experiences may heighten the awareness of being excluded from the majority culture. In order to protect themselves from feeling alone and isolated, some Jews may turn to their Jewish community to find respite or may deepen their connection to G-d by focusing on religious aspects of Judaism.

*Meaninglessness* refers to the idea that life does not have an inherent meaning (SommersFlanagan & Sommers-Flanagan, 2017). Meaninglessness can lead to an existential vacuum – a feeling of emptiness and boredom, which may cause some people to withdraw and cease to engage in activities (Corey, 2017). According to Frankl (1988), all individuals are unique and have to discover their unique meaning. Meaning can be found by doing a good deed, by creating or experiencing something or someone (e.g., writing a book, watching the sunset), or by taking a stand in a difficult situation, "a stand which allows for transmuting their predicament into achievement, triumph, and heroism" (Frankl, 1988, p. 70). Only by confronting life in its totality, including pain, guilt, and death can individuals deal effectively with despair and turn it into a triumph or meaningful experience (Corey, 2017).

According to Prell (2000), developing a Jewish identity is meaningful in itself, as it tends to be chosen by the individual Jew. However, some Jewish individuals may experience meaninglessness due to their Jewish identity (e.g., when facing discrimination or reminded of the Shoah). In those situations, existential counseling can be especially helpful as it assists clients to shift their focus from what is not working to what options are still available. Frankl´s personal life experiences may serve as a testimony as to how suffering and tragedy can be turned into a triumph. He was a survivor of Auschwitz concentration camp and found meaning in his experience by writing about it and by sharing with others what he observed in the concentration camps (Frankl, 2008). It is because of his experiences in the death camps that he realized that even under the worst living conditions finding meaning is possible.

*Death* is probably the ultimate concern that is the most anxiety provoking. Yalom (2008) compares the awareness of death with staring at the sun. We can look at the sun only for a short period before we have to look away (Yalom, 2008). In existential counseling, the awareness of death is what makes life significant. Death is not viewed negatively. Instead, death is viewed as a motivator to live life to the fullest and to take advantage of every moment while we are alive (Corey, 2017).

Besides the four ultimate concerns, existential counseling theory recognizes four private worlds through which we experience our lives (Sommers-Flanagan & Sommers-Flanagan, 2017): 1) Umwelt, 2) Mitwelt, 3) Eigenwelt, and 4) Überwelt. These four worlds are experienced simultaneously; however, the focus may change.

The *Umwelt* refers to the individual´s physical world, the environment in which we live. It describes the biological dimension and includes awareness of the body, physical sensations, and attitudes towards food, sex, objects, and surroundings (Deurzen, 2002). According to Deurzen (2002), disturbances in the physical world tend to be relevant and should be explored as it may provide valuable information about the individual's reality. When working with Jewish clients, professional counselors may want to become familiar with the client´s setting where the client lives (e.g., area with many Jewish neighbors with access to kosher food, a non-Jewish area with limited access to a Jewish community) and how this impacts the client's well-being.

The *Mitwelt* refers to the individual´s public world and addresses interpersonal interactions and relationships with other individuals (Deurzen, 2002). The social, political, and cultural environment, such as class, ethnicity, language, cultural history, and family, are aspects of the *Mitwelt* and impact an individual’s actions, feelings, and thoughts related to these environmental aspects (Deurzen, 2002). This dimension is related to important oppositions such as “dominance and submission, acceptance and rejection, love and hate” (Deurzen, 2002, p. 70). Exploring the Mitwelt of Jewish clients may be relevant during times where antisemitism seems to be ubiquitous. Exploring issues around rejection and hate may bring to light if and to what extent clients’ actions and feelings may be negatively impacted.

The *Eigenwelt* refers to the world of the self (Sommers-Flanagan & Sommers-Flanagan, 2017). It is the place where individuals feel at home and comfortable; it includes anything that individuals identify as their own, such as feelings, thoughts, ideas, and kinship (Deurzen, 2002). According to Deurzen (2002), it is central to explore the Eigenwelt of clients in counseling sessions as this may reveal particular strengths and weaknesses. By exploring the Eigenwelt of a Jewish client professional counselors may be able to assist clients in exploring how being Jewish has helped (e.g., feeling proud to be Jewish) or hindered (e.g., internalizing antisemitism) in their personal development.

*Überwelt* refers to the spiritual world and the belief system of individuals (SommersFlanagan & Sommers-Flanagan, 2017). The spiritual dimension also includes creativity, humor, the ability to find meaning, and self-transcendence and is not necessarily connected to religious beliefs (Frankl, 1988). According to Deurzen (2002), beliefs and values tend to come up in counseling sessions at some point in time and can be helpful in assisting individuals in finding the strength to overcome external and internal struggles. Because of the diversity within the Jewish community, professional counselors should not readily assume that all Jews are observant or identify as Jewish because of religious aspects. Therefore, it may be helpful for counselors to explore the spiritual dimension with Jewish clients to get a better understanding of the client´s values and to what extent their Jewish identity is based on religious or ethnic aspects.

#### Herman´s Theory on Jewish Identity
Herman identified the following nine criteria for Jewish group identity: 1) marking off, 2) bases of alignment, 3) sense of mutual responsibility, 4) alignment across time, 5) alignment across space, 6) perception of the group´s attributes and its position in the life-space, 7) valence of Jewishness, 8) adoption of Jewish norms: A question of distinctiveness, and 9) interaction with other subidentities. I will provide a brief definition of each criteria in the following paragraphs.

*Marking off* refers to a feeling of otherness. Members of a minority are often aware that members of the majority view them as a distinct or separate group (Herman, 1989). Experiences with discrimination can cause feelings of otherness. Remembering the Shoah, hate crimes against Jews in the U.S., or anti-Zionist events on school campuses are examples that may serve as reminders for Jewish individuals and non-Jews alike of the distinctiveness of the Jewish community. However, at times, Jews themselves may want to draw a line between themselves and others (Herman, 1989). There may be situations such as the celebration of Jewish holidays where Jews will mark themselves off and feel proud to maintain a certain distinctiveness.

*Bases of alignment* refer to the idea of group connection and interdependence. It relates to a sense of a common fate. “In the context of Jewish life, this means that whatever happens to Jews qua Jews anywhere has implications for Jews everywhere ” (Herman, 1989, p. 43) The *sense of mutual responsibility* refers to a feeling of responsibility Jews may feel towards other Jews (e.g., Jews helping and supporting other Jews; Safirstein, 2002). *Alignment across time* implies a connection between Jews that goes beyond the moment. It refers to the connection Jews may feel towards Jews who lived in the past or future generations. *Alignment across space,* according to Herman (1989), refers to the relationship Jews may feel towards other Jews independently of where they live. He further contends that the connection Jews may experience towards other Jews anywhere in the diaspora may grow stronger especially at times when Jews experience more stressors than usual.

*Perception of group´s attributes and its position in the life-space* is connected to religious as well as ethnic components of Jewish identity. A person´s view of what it means to be a Jew influences the relationship this person will have to fellow Jews. Herman (1989) posited that a weakening of one of these two components may lead to a weakening of Jewish identity in general. For instance, Jews who perceive their identity as merely a religious identity may feel less connected to Jews outside their local community, while Jews with an ethno-religious Jewish identity will experience a stronger sense of kinship towards fellow Jews independently of where the fellow Jews live. Herman (1989) further contended that salience and centrality play an important role as well. Salience refers to the level to which Jewishness is emphasized by the individual (Safirstein, 2002). Centrality refers to how important one´s Jewishness is compared to other identities the individual may hold (Safirstein, 2002). Antisemitic experiences may function as a reminder of one´s Jewish identity, and the frequency of these reminders may contribute to the centrality of one´s Jewish identity (Herman, 1989).

*Valence of Jewishness* refers to the extent to which Jews adopt the norms and customs of their group (Herman, 1989). The opinion Jews have about the Jewish people may impact their feelings and thoughts about their group membership (Safirstein, 2002). For instance, Jews who may hold a negative view of the characteristics of the Jewish community may feel ashamed of being Jewish, while individuals who see only positive features may feel pride and gain strength from their group membership (Safirstein, 2002).

*The adoption of Jewish norms: A question of distinctiveness* refers to the Jewish minority´s ability to maintain their distinctiveness while being surrounded by a majority culture. According to Safirstein (2002), the Jewish community in the U.S. struggles with maintaining their distinctive customs and traditions, such as speaking Yiddish. She further contended that the degree to which individuals maintain Jewish norms and customs, like adhering to Jewish values, Jewish education, and celebration of holidays, impacts the feelings Jews may experience regarding their group membership.

*Interaction with other subidentities* refers to the idea that American Jews tend to hold more than one identity. Herman (1989) suggested that to understand Jewish identity in the U.S., it is important to recognize that there may be an interaction between the Jewish identity and the American identity. Depending on the situation an individual´s Jewish identity may be more noticeable than the American identity and vice versa. Herman (1989) stated that in the U.S. “the American Jew acts as an American and only on special occasions as a Jew” (p. 57).

### Herman´s Theory and Existentialism: Relevance to this Research
Herman´s theory and existential theory were used in this study as both address essential aspects of what it means to live as a Jew in this world. Herman´s theory was applied to address and explain Jewish identity in general, while existential theory was applied to get a better understanding of how Jewish identity may impact individuals’ experiences. At first sight the two theories may seem to have little in common; however, there are many parallels. Both theories support the notion that connections with other human beings are essential (marking off/isolation). Both theories address the significance of making choices and taking responsibility (sense of mutual responsibility/adoption of Jewish norms/freedom), and both address the importance of finding meaning (perception of group´s attributes and its position in the lifespace/interaction of subidentities/meaninglessness).

Research on Jewish identity shows that Jewish identity is expressed and experienced differently by individuals (Friedman et al., 2005; Herman, 1989; Langman, 1999; MacdonaldDennis, 2006). This is also in line with Yalom (1980), who contends that while every human being will be confronted with the same four ultimate concerns, how individuals confront and experience these concerns will be different for each person. Thus, as Herman´s theory and existentialism have overlapping themes, I proposed the integration of these two theories as a lens through which I viewed the study.

### Chapter Summary
The differences between Jewish identity, White ethnic identities, and minority identities are twofold. First Jewish identity is based on ethnic and religious components that tend to be intertwined. Second, while most Jews can pass as White in the U.S., experiences with antisemitism, including anti-Zionism, serve as reminders of the minority status of Jews. Research with Jewish participants has provided evidence that experiences with discrimination are common and that these experiences tend to have a negative impact on the Jewish individual´s mental health and overall well-being (Gold, 2004).

The resurgence of antisemitic hate crimes worldwide and in the U.S. show that antisemitism continues to be an issue in today´s society (ADL, 2017a). Counselor educators and professional counselors play an important role in addressing antisemitism and its impact on the Jewish community (CACREP, 2016). Thus, it is crucial that all counselors are aware of the distinct needs of this community and that they are prepared to provide multiculturally sensitive and effective counseling services. 

However, according to Langman (1999), Rubin (2017), and Weinrach (2002), Jewish issues continue to be excluded from multicultural discussions. Consequently, many professional counselors and counselor educators may have insufficient preparation and lack the knowledge and skills to work with Jewish clients. Research shows that a lack of appropriate multicultural training can have a negative impact on minority clients (Sue & Sue, 2008). Therefore, this study was intended to address current gaps of knowledge related to Jewish identity and its relationship to antisemitism.

***

#### Table of Contents
{: .no_toc}

<ul><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-1/">CHAPTER ONE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-2/">CHAPTER TWO</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-3/">CHAPTER THREE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-4/">CHAPTER FOUR</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-5/">CHAPTER FIVE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-6/">References</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-7/">Appendix A</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-8/">Appendix B</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-9/">Appendix C</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-10/">Appendix D</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-11/">Appendix E</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-12/">Appendix F</a></li></ul>

***

</div>
