---
layout: default
title: CHAPTER ONE
parent: § Antisemitism Today and Its Relationship to Jewish Identity and Religious Denomination  
grand_parent: A 
nav_order: 10 
---
<style>
.dont-break-out {
  /* These are technically the same, but use both */
  overflow-wrap: break-word;
  word-wrap: break-word;

     -ms-word-break: break-all;
  /* This is the dangerous one in WebKit, as it breaks things wherever */
  word-break: break-all;
  /* Instead use this non-standard one: */
  word-break: break-word;
}

.youtube-container {
    position: relative;
    width: 100%;
    height: 0;
    padding-bottom: 56.25%;
}
.youtube-video {
    position: absolute;
    top: 0;
    left: 0;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
}

</style>

<div class="dont-break-out" markdown="1">

1. TOC
{:toc}

## CHAPTER ONE
### Introduction
Jewish identity is an ethno-religious identity. It is comprised of religious and ethnic aspects that tend to be interwoven (Herman, 1989). Herman (1989) described Jews as a people, civilization, an ethnicity, a culture, and a religious group. The combination of religious and cultural aspects of Judaism along with history and rituals is what creates a Jew´s identity (Levitt & Balkin, 2003). Thus, Jewish identity can be based on national aspects, such as peoplehood or feelings of belonging to the people of Israel and a connection to the country of Israel. In the United States (U.S.) Jewish identity often includes cultural practices such as going to Jewish summer camp, using Yiddish expressions, and consumption of specific foods. Additionally, religious aspects such as religious education, religious practices, and beliefs play a significant role in the development of a Jewish identity. Jewish identity is a complex and unique identity and may be experienced as a blend of religious and ethnic components. In other words, Jewish identity is the lived experience of Judaism, and because it contains a variety of elements, it may be experienced and expressed differently by each Jew.

Religious affiliation is one way in which Jews may express their identity. There are many different Jewish denominations, such as Jewish renewal, Reform, Reconstructionist, Conservative, and Orthodox Judaism. Orthodox Judaism is an umbrella term for a variety of Orthodox movements such as Modern Orthodox, Hasidic, Chabad, and other Jewish divisions. In the U.S., there are three major movements: 1) Orthodox, 2) Conservative, and 3) Reform. Orthodox, Reform, and Conservative Judaism are considered the three most influential denominations within Judaism (Altman, Inman, Fine, Ritter, & Howard, 2010). One of the main differences between denominations is the interpretation of Jewish scripture as well as the level of observance (Mareschal, 2012). Jewish practices and adherence to Jewish scriptures and its laws (halakhah) can be best understood as being on a continuum. On one side of the continuum is Orthodoxy, and on the other is the Reform movement. Conservative Judaism is situated between these two movements (Wertheimer, 2007). Orthodox Jews tend to be the most observant group compared to other streams of Judaism. They interpret Jewish scripture literally and strictly follow halakhah (Mareschal, 2012). Conservative Judaism is often viewed as a middle ground between Orthodox and Reform Judaism. The idea behind the Conservative movement is to preserve traditional Judaism while being open to adjusting practices to the needs of today´s society (Mareschal, 2012). Reform Jews are considered to be less observant by the other branches of Judaism. According to Mareschal (2012), individuals may tweak customs and practices depending on personal needs. According to a Pew Study from 2013, 35% of Jews in the U.S. identify with the Reform movement, 18% identify with the Conservative movement, and 10% of all Jews consider themselves to be Orthodox, while 30% report no denomination with any of the Jewish movements (Liu, 2013).

Some researchers have pointed out that Jewish identity is often misunderstood as an exclusively religious identity (Altman et al., 2010; Langman, 1999; Macdonald-Dennis, 2006). Most Jews in the U.S. tend to self-identify as Jews culturally, and it appears that religion plays a lesser role (Klaff, 2006). According to Klaff (2006), Jews who relate to being Jewish based on culture rather than religion may display ethnic behaviors such as traveling to Israel, being involved in non-religious Jewish organizations (e.g., Jewish Community Centers, AntiDefamation League; ADL), and having Jewish friends. A national survey by the Pew Research Center (Liu, 2013) revealed that for 62% of the 3,475 participants being Jewish is primarily a matter of ancestry and culture. Only 15% reported that Jewish identity is mainly a matter of religion, and 23% viewed Jewish identity as equally an issue of religious ancestry and culture (Liu, 2013). It appears that there is more than one way to express one´s Jewishness.

A person´s identity is comprised of several factors such as gender, age, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation, nationality, religion, and ethnic heritage. "Ethnic identity is just one of many identities, and several ethnic identities may be held at the same time" (Fernando, 2012, p. 119). For instance, an individual with a bicultural identity (the term bi-ethnic does not exist in American Standard English) may ethnically identify as German and Italian at the same time. Historically, ethnicity is inclusive of national origin, culture, and common language (Quintana, 2007). According to Herman (1989), ethnic identity is connected to aspects individuals share with other people of the same group. These aspects serve ethnic groups to set themselves apart from other groups due to the possession of particular attributes, which can be physical or cultural (Herman, 1989). The term ethnicity is therefore used to describe a group of people who share a cultural heritage, a common history, values, beliefs, and language (Day-Vines et al., 2007). According to Phinney and Ong (2007) ethnic identity emerges from a sense of belonging to a particular group of people and participation in cultural activities and can serve as a protection against the negative effects of discrimination (Phinney, Jacoby, & Charissa, 2007). Choosing an ethnic identity is an act of self-categorization, in which a people label themselves as being part of a particular social group (Ashmore, Deaux, & McLaughlin-Volpe, 2004).

There are a few research studies that examine Jewish identity from a more holistic point of view, focusing on Jewish ethnicity and not only on religion. A qualitative study by Altman et al. (2010) with five women and five men ages 20 – 27 who identified as Conservative Jews reveals that participants endorsed the importance of family and maintenance of a Jewish way of life as well as remembering Jewish history and the impact of antisemitism. Glicksman and Korpeckyj-Cox (2009) analyzed data from the 2000-2001 National Jewish Population Survey (NJPS). The sample was based on the responses of 1,099 participants who were 65 years or older. The analysis of the data suggests that participants who were affiliated with a denomination were more likely to report a stronger ethnic Jewish identity than those who observe Judaism without affiliation or individuals who follow Judaism along with another faith. At the same time, they were also less likely than the other two groups to indicate that religion was important in their life (Glicksman & Korpeckyj-Cox, 2009). The findings of these two studies suggest that Jewish ethnicity is a feature of Jewish identity and thus, further research regarding Jewish ethnic identity seems to be warranted.

Another significant factor that tends to impact Jewish identity is antisemitism. Wilhelm Marr coined the term *Antisemitismus* (antisemitism in English) in 1873. It replaced the original word *Judenhaß* (hatred of Jews). It described a non-religious, racially based hatred of Jews (Zafer-Smith, 2003). According to Wistrich (1991), religious hostility was viewed as backward in the late nineteenth century, and so a more neutral and scientific term was needed. The term antisemitism, which was based on racial and ethnic aspects, provided a solution that made antiJewish sentiments sound more objective (Wistrich, 1991). Today, antisemitism refers to the hatred or hostility towards Jews as a religious, ethnic, or racial group (Marcus, 2015).

Antisemitism is a set of negative beliefs and attitudes based on ideology, myths, and stereotypes about Jews as individuals or as a group (Marcus, 2015). These stereotypes and myths do not need to be based on facts (Pollak, 2008). Usually, anti-Jewish feelings and thoughts are grounded on imaginary characteristics of what is believed to be the typical Jew (Pollak, 2008). The hatred of Jews continues to be a pervasive issue worldwide. Antisemitic incidents have been rising globally, including in the U.S. since 2014 (ADL, 2015, 2018). This trend has also reached college campuses in the U.S. According to the 2014 national demographic survey of American Jewish college students, 55% of Jewish college students reported having experienced some form of antisemitism (Kosmin & Keysar, 2015). The resurgence of antisemitism and especially anti-Zionism (hostility toward the State of Israel) are critical issues on college campuses (Marcus, 2007). This is also supported by Beckwith and Rossman-Benjamin (2018) who reported that antisemitic incidents, and more specifically antisemitic incidents motivated by anti-Israel attitudes, increased by 89% from 2016 to 2017. Antisemitic feelings and thoughts are frequently expressed by targeting the State of Israel. This form of antisemitism, called anti-Zionism, tends to be viewed by many as socially acceptable (Weinstein & Jackson, 2010). According to Pollak (2008), it is possible that existing stereotypes about "the Jew" are impacting how people view the conflict between Israelis and Arabs. Thus, anti-Zionism may affect the lives of many Jews in the U.S. For instance, 55% of Jewish college students in the U.S. report having experienced some form of antisemitism (Kosmin & Keysar, 2015). According to the ADL (2015, 2018), in 2014 antisemitic incidents in the U.S. had increased by 21%, and current statistics suggest that this trend also continued in 2015 and the following years. More than half (52%) of all religious hate crimes in 2014 were committed against the Jewish community (Federal Bureau of Investigation; FBI, 2015). In 2018 almost 60% (56.9%) of all religious hate crimes targeted the Jewish community (FBI, 2019).

Considering the data made available by the FBI and ADL and the fact that some of the research that has been cited in this study is dated due to lack of newer studies, further research regarding the impact of antisemitism and anti-Zionism seems to be justified. Contemporary Jewish identity cannot be adequately understood without considering the effects of outbreaks of antisemitism. Some Jewish individuals may experience these outbreaks as a threat and a reminder that the Shoah (Holocaust) could reoccur (Herman, 1989) and thus have a direct impact on Jewish individuals’ well-being and mental health.

### Statement of the Problem
Despite evidence that suggests that identity and cultural membership as well as experiences with discrimination and microaggressions significantly impact an individual´s wellbeing and mental health (Nadal, Griffin, Wong, Hamit, & Rasmus, 2014; Phinney et al., 2007), there is sparse literature in the counseling profession analyzing the identity and the effects of discrimination of persons from ethno-religious groups such as Jews in the U.S. Current research appears to focus on identity development and experiences with racism of visible minorities such as African-Americans or Latino-Americans. Jewish identity and the impact of antisemitism, including anti-Zionism and discrimination against the Jewish community, tend to be overlooked and are rarely explored in the multicultural field (Macdonald-Dennis, 2006; Rubin, 2017). Current research suggests that there is a relationship between perceived discrimination and symptoms of depression for individuals of the Jewish community (Weisskirch, Kim, Schwartz, & Whitbourne, 2016). The Pittsburgh synagogue shooting in 2018, in which 11 Jews were murdered, the Poway, California synagogue shooting in 2019 in which one Jew was murdered, the Jersey City kosher supermarket shooting in 2019 in which four people were murdered (two Jews and two non-Jews), and the stabbing in Monsey, New York during Hanukkah in 2019 in which five people were injured and countless assaults on Hassidic and Orthodox Jews in New York City demonstrate that the hatred of Jews continues to be a serious and pervasive issue in the U.S. All of the events took place in a span of a little over one year. The Pittsburgh shooting happened in October of 2018, shortly before I started collecting my data in December 2018, and the stabbing in Monsey happened only three months after I finished collecting my data in September of 2019. According to the latest FBI statistics almost 60% (56.9%) of all religious hate crimes were motivated by anti-Jewish bias (FBI, 2019). Due to this development and the fact that Jewish individuals tend to seek out counseling services more often than other ethnic groups it is likely that counselors will work with individuals from the Jewish community at some point in time (Langman, 1997; Midlarsky, Pirutinsky, & Cohen, 2012).

Counselors and counselor educators play an important role in addressing mental health issues. This encompasses addressing the impact of ethnic identity development, religious membership, as well as any form of racism, such as antisemitism on an individual´s overall wellbeing. According to the *Code of Ethics* of the American Counseling Association (ACA) all professional counselors are required to be knowledgeable about cultural differences among diverse groups and within these groups (ACA, 2014). Furthermore, all professional counselors are required to provide culturally sensitive services to diverse groups that are effective and beneficial to the group members (ACA, 2014). However, due to the lack of research on Jewish identity and antisemitism as well as the possibility that some graduate programs may exclude Jewish topics in classes about multiculturalism it is uncertain that mental health professionals are equipped to work with individuals of the Jewish community (Langman, 1999; Rubin, 2017). In order for professional counselors to be able to address mental health issues such as depression in Jewish clients, more research will be necessary to get a better understanding if there is a relationship between exposure to antisemitism and depression for Jews.

Jewish identity is often wrongly compared to a Christian religious identity. “Judaism is not just a religious creed analogous to Christianity” (Herman, 1989, p. 36). While Christian identities are religious identities only and are separate from ethnicity, Jewish identity tends to be both an ethnic and religious identity simultaneously. Thus, describing Jews as only a religious group, like Christians, omits a part of their Jewish identity. Ethnicity appears to be an essential aspect of identity for many Jews.

Current research has provided evidence that Jewish identity is comprised of an ethnic identity and a religious identity (Altman et al., 2010; Glicksman & Korpeckyj-Cox, 2009). Friedlander et al. (2010) found that while ethnic and religious identities are intertwined, they are separate aspects of Jewish identity. Additionally, the results of their study suggest that, overall, more observant and traditional Jews tend to report a stronger Jewish identity (Friedlander et al., 2010). However, to date, only one research study has analyzed if there is a relationship between the strengths of Jewish identity and membership in one of the major Jewish denominations.

Over the last two decades a variety of researchers (e.g., Altman et al., 2010; Langman, 1999; Macdonald-Dennis, 2006; Rubin, 2013; Rubin, 2017) have pointed out that discussions about discrimination of Jews continue to be absent in the field of multicultural counseling and social justice classes at the university level. The reasons for this absence may be because many believe that antisemitism is no longer a problem and because Jews are now considered to be part of the White majority (Langman, 1995). It is also possible that antisemitic beliefs such as Jews are rich, powerful, and control the media and the banks, have been a reason for the exclusion of antisemitism and Jewish issues in multicultural discussions. In fact, no studies exist that have analyzed the relationship between Jewish identity and experiences of antisemitism. Due to the lack of research studies exploring this relationship, it may be difficult for counselors and social justice advocates today to address Jewish issues such as antisemitism, including anti-Zionism, and their impact on Jewish identity appropriately.

Furthermore, there appears to be no research that has investigated to what extent antiZionism is affecting Jewish individuals today. What is known is that anti-Zionism is considered by many as a more acceptable manner of expressing anti-Jewish feelings and that people who are antisemitic also tend to be hostile towards the State of Israel (Weinstein & Jackson, 2010). We also know that anti-Zionism appears to be an issue, especially on university campuses across the U.S. (Taylor, 2017). However, there are to date no studies that analyze if and to what extent Jewish individuals experience anti-Zionism.

### Research Questions
Based on available research, it seems that there is a gap in knowledge in understanding the relationship between Jewish identity, religious affiliation, and antisemitism. Moreover, due to the increase of anti-Israel attitudes in the U.S., it seems necessary to determine if professional counselors and counselor educators may need to include anti-Zionism in addition to other forms of antisemitism as a form of prejudice when addressing multicultural issues. The current gap is what informed the following research questions:

1. What is the relationship between Jewish identity (religious and ethnic) and experiences of antisemitism? 
    Hypothesis 1: Jews who report a higher level of religious and ethnic identity are more likely to experience greater antisemitism. 

2. What is the relationship between Jewish religious affiliation and experiences of antisemitism? 
    Hypothesis 2.1: Jews who are affiliated with the Orthodox stream of Judaism are more likely to experience greater antisemitism than Jews who are part of the Conservative movement. 
    Hypothesis 2.2: Conservative Jews are more likely to experience greater antisemitism than Reform Jews.

3. What, if any, type of antisemitism (e.g., ethnic or religiously based antisemitism or anti-Zionism) do Jewish individuals experience most often?

### Purpose of the Study
The primary purpose of this quantitative study was to address the current gap in the literature regarding the relationship between antisemitism and Jewish identity. Antisemitism is a form of oppression that can be based on racial prejudice, religious beliefs, myths, and stereotypes about Jews or anti-Zionism (Pollak, 2008). Jewish identity is an identity composed of ethnic or cultural aspects intertwined with religion (Klaff, 2006). I hoped that my study would determine if there is a relationship between antisemitism and Jewish identity. For instance, I wanted to know if Jewish people who report a higher level of Jewish identity (religious and ethnic identity) also report higher levels of experiences with antisemitism. Moreover, I wanted to find out if Jewish individuals who report a lower level of Jewish identity report lower levels of antisemitism. In the end, I hoped that the study would determine whether there was a relationship between antisemitism and Jewish identity.

The second purpose of the study was to find out if there was a relationship between antisemitism and religious affiliation. Religious affiliation refers to membership in a particular Jewish denomination (e.g., Orthodox, Conservative, or Reform). I was curious to see if the chosen denomination had an impact on the level and frequency of experiences with antisemitism as well as the perception of the seriousness of antisemitism. Existing literature on the relationship between a denomination and Jewish identity suggests that Orthodox Jews tend to report higher Jewish religious and ethnic identity than Conservative Jews and Reform Jews (Friedlander et al., 2010). It is possible that the type of denomination one belongs to does not only impact Jewish identity but also experiences with antisemitism.

The third purpose of the quantitative study was to investigate if and what form of antisemitism Jews today report experiencing most often. My goal was to examine whether antisemitism is expressed primarily based on 1) ethnic bias, 2) religious ideas, or 3) anti-Zionism (questioning the legitimacy of the existence of Israel). I was especially interested in investigating this question because anti-Zionism appears to have become more acceptable in society and especially on university campuses (Marcus, 2007; Weinstein & Jackson, 2010).

### Significance of the Study
The American Counseling Association (ACA), the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP), and the Association for Spiritual, Ethical, and Religious Values in Counseling (ASERVIC) require that professional counselors and counselor educators demonstrate specific competencies. For instance, professional counselors need to be able to address multicultural issues and know about diversity within groups, religious and spiritual issues, as well as matters such as oppression and discrimination (ACA, 2014; ASERVIC, 2015; CACREP, 2016). However, due to the lack of research on Jewish identity and the impact of antisemitism on Jewish individuals, professional counselors and counselor educators may not have the necessary knowledge to fulfill the expected professional competencies.

It is crucial that professional counselors and counselor educators are aware that Jewish identity tends to be comprised of both ethnic and religious aspects and that these aspects are often intertwined (Friedlander et al., 2010; Herman, 1989; Langman, 1999). Jewish individuals are more likely than other ethnic groups to seek counseling services (Langman, 1997; Midlarsky et al., 2012), and thus professional counselors and counselor educators are likely to work with this population. Culturally sensitive and appropriate counseling services for Jewish clients can only be ensured if professional counselors address and explore all aspects of Jewish identity.

Mental health counselors may also want to consider that the separation of religion and ethnicity may be appropriate to categorize non-Jews (Herman, 1989). However, imposing this separation on a Jewish client may lead to misinterpretations and misunderstandings. Jewish identity is multifaceted. Professional counselors who believe that Jews are only a religious group may not consider exploring Jewish identity when a client reports being a secular Jew.

Many researchers (e.g., Langman, 1999; Macdonald-Dennis, 2006; Zafer-Smith, 2003) have contended that antisemitism should be part of social justice and multicultural education for all professional counselors and counselor educators. However, this is often not the case (Langman, 1999; Levitt & Balkin, 2003). According to Langman (1999) and Zafer-Smith (2003), the hatred of Jews is often left out when discussing other forms of oppression, such as sexism or racism, even though antisemitism is a type of racism. Considering the resurgence of antisemitism worldwide as well as recent high-profile events in Charlottesville, Virginia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Jersey City, New Jersey, Judaism and antisemitism have a place in discussions about multiculturalism in counseling. Many researchers have pointed out that the multicultural field has so far tended to exclude Jews as a minority group for reasons such as Jews are considered racially White, Jews are no longer struggling economically, or the belief that antisemitism is no longer a problem (Langman, 1999; Macdonald-Dennis, 2006; Rubin, 2013).

Consequently, many professional counselors and counselor educators may not be aware of potential fears within the Jewish community and may inadvertently invalidate antisemitic experiences of their Jewish clients and students. Macdonald-Dennis (2006) found that experiences with antisemitism and the minimization of the phenomenon appear to have an impact on Jewish identity and the mental health and overall well-being of Jews. In the worstcase scenario, the professional counselor or counselor educator unknowingly may make remarks that are based on stereotypes or myths about the Jewish people. In addition, they may make assumptions about the socio-economic status of the Jewish population that are not accurate and consequently harm the client or the student´s learning. Additionally, professional counselors may need to recognize and help clients addressing forms of internalized antisemitism. Hence, more research is necessary to determine the type of antisemitism Jewish people experience and the relationship between antisemitism and the level or strength of Jewish identity.

Additionally, it is essential that professional counselors and counselor educators are aware of the religious diversity within the Jewish community to be better equipped to address the mental health needs of all Jewish individuals (Langman, 1999; Levitt & Balkin, 2003). The needs of non-affiliated Jews may be different from the needs of Jews who are part of the Conservative, Reform, or Orthodox movement.

According to Sue and Sue (2008), “The erroneous belief that all Asians are the same, all Blacks are the same, all Hispanics are the same, or all American Indians are the same has led to numerous therapeutic problems” (p. 235). Ergo, believing that all Jews are the same may also result in therapeutic problems such as early termination, the perpetuation of stereotypes, or minimizing the client´s experiences with antisemitism. Friedlander et al. (2010) contended that professional counselors and counselor educators should not assume that non-religious or nonaffiliated Jews or Jews who report that being Jewish is not relevant to them do not experience antisemitism. Therefore, it seemed to be important to determine the relationship between antisemitism and religious affiliation or lack of religious affiliation. Undertaking this type of investigation helps uncover meaningful differences between Jews who are affiliated with one of the major Jewish denominations or who are non-affiliated.

### Theoretical Framework
This quantitative dissertation was informed by Herman´s (1989) theory of Jewish identity as well as existentialism; consequently, I drew from identity development, social psychology, and counseling theory. I chose to use these two theories for my study as my counseling approach is heavily influenced by existentialism and because Herman´s theory is one of the few theories on identity that focuses on Jewish identity from a holistic point of view. Herman´s (1989) theory is based on his research on Jews living in the U.S. and Israel. Herman (1989) considered religious and ethnic aspects in his theory and incorporated cognitive, affective, and behavioral aspects. He looked at Jewish experiences in their totality and thus included the impact of the Shoah, the establishment of Israel, as well as the social context in which a Jewish community lives. According to Herman (1989), when analyzing Jewish identity, it is essential to look at:

> “ a) the nature of the individual´s relationship to the Jewish group as a membership group; and b) the individual´s perception of the attributes of the Jewish group, his feelings about them, and the extent to which its norms are adopted by him as a source of reference. This necessitates a consideration of the content of the Jewish group identity.” (p. 39).

Existential theory is a philosophical counseling approach based on the thoughts and ideas of European existential philosophers (Deurzen, 2002). Existential counseling aims to assist individuals to come to terms with what it means to be human, to make sense of life (Yalom, 1980). Existential counseling theories posit there is no preordained meaning in life, and there are no guidelines on how to live a life other than those people create for themselves (Yalom, 1980). Finding meaning and making meaning is a subjective experience and all individuals are responsible for creating their meaning (Frankl, 2008). The professional counselor´s goal is, therefore, to assist clients in finding their purpose and meaning in life and living a fuller and more authentic life according to clients´ values and beliefs.

Existential theory and Herman´s (1989) theory are used as a lens to understand experiences with antisemitism and its relationship to Jewish identity and Jewish religious affiliation by looking at how individual Jews make sense of their group membership and their life circumstances. Moreover, existentialism and Herman´s theory recognize that the context in which individuals live impacts how they experience and interpret events. For instance, existential theory addresses how relationships with family members, friends, and the surrounding community influence a feeling of belonging or isolation. Similarly, Herman (1989) discussed how experiences with antisemitism can influence if a Jew feels accepted by surrounding nonJewish communities. Existential counseling tenets are similar to Herman´s theory in recognizing that there are commonalities as well as differences between human beings. According to existential theory, we are all influenced by environmental factors and historical events, however, how we process, adjust to, and integrate these occurrences in our lives may be different for each person and a personal choice.

Similarly, Herman (1989) acknowledged that there are commonalities among the many Jewish communities. However, variations exist as political and social movements impact how Jews react and adjust their Jewish lifestyle. Both theories acknowledge the uniqueness of individuals while also recognizing that individuals do not live in a vacuum but are also part of a greater collective. The difference between existential theory and Herman´s theory is the difference between emphasizing individualistic and collective aspects. That is, existential theory tends to put more emphasis on the uniqueness of the individual, while Herman´s theory tends to stress the commonalities of Jewish individuals. By combining both theories, I was well positioned to look at both individual and collective aspects that impact Jewish identity, religious affiliation, and experiences with antisemitism.

### Chapter Summary
Jewish identity is complex and is based on ethnic and religious aspects that tend to be intertwined for most Jews. This sets Jewish identity apart from other ethnic identities that tend to be based on cultural and ethnic aspects only. It is also important to realize that Jewish identity is not a religious identity comparable to Christianity as Jewish identity is based on descent and not on assent. Moreover, Jewish identity tends to be impacted by experiences with antisemitism. Research has provided evidence that the memory of the Shoah continues to be an important part of Jewish identity (Herman, 1989). However, Jewish identity is not only impacted by antisemitic crimes of the past but also by antisemitic hate crimes today as well as anti-Israel attitudes. According to ADL (2018), current statistics show that there has been a significant increase in antisemitic incidents. Thus, more research is warranted to analyze how antisemitism impacts the Jewish communities in the U.S. and to provide professional counselors and counselor educators with meaningful information on what the experiences and possible needs of Jewish individuals are who seek counseling services today.

### Organization of the Dissertation
The present dissertation is comprised of five chapters. Chapter one contains the introduction and background literature, the problem statement, as well as the purpose and significance of the study. Chapter two provides an in-depth literature review. Chapter three describes the methodology, including the hypotheses being tested, the sample of the population, instruments used to collect data, and the procedures for data analysis. Chapter four provides descriptive data of the participants as well as the actual data analysis and the results. Chapter five discusses the implications that can be derived from the analysis of the data as well as limitations of my study and ideas for future research.

### Definition of Terms
**Antisemitism** is the hatred or hostility towards Jews as a religious, ethnic, or racial group (Pollak, 2008). 

**Anti-Zionism** is defined as hostility towards the State of Israel. Often this hostility is based on the belief that the State of Israel has no right to exist or claims that Israel is comparable to Nazi Germany (Kiewe, 2007).

**Conservative Judaism** was created as a response to Reform Judaism. The goal of Conservative Judaism was to honor traditional Judaism while adjusting to modern society (Langman, 1999). Synagogue services tend to be in Hebrew; however, like Reform services men and women sit together. Conservative Judaism as a movement continues to observe kashrut (keeping kosher) and the Shabbat. In general, Conservative Judaism is considered to be less adherent to halakhah then Orthodox Judaism and more adherent then Reform Judaism.

**Ethnicity identity** is a construct that derives from a sense of group membership. It is formed over time and can be based on commonalities such as history, nationality, language, religion, culture, physical appearance, ancestry, and traditions. Ethnic identity is a personal identity and depends on the individual´s social experiences, thoughts, and feelings (Markus, 2008). 

**Jewish identity** is considered an ethno-religious identity. It is based on religious (belief system) and ethnic (feelings of belonging to the people Israel) components that tend to be intertwined. Jewish identity varies from individual to individual as the combination of religious and cultural aspects of Judaism including Jewish history and rituals all together create a Jewish identity.

**Orthodox Judaism** is one of the three major Jewish denominations in the U.S., besides Conservative and Reform Judaism. Orthodox Jews tend to view their practice as normative rather than being part of a specific movement. The three most important areas of observance that define Orthodoxy are keeping kosher, observing Shabbat, and following the laws of family purity (Langman, 1999). Synagogue services are in Hebrew and men and women are seated separately. Orthodox Judaism is considered to be stricter in its observance of halakhah compared to Conservative Judaism and Reform Judaism.

**Reform Judaism** developed in reaction to the Enlightenment in the early 18th century in Europe. The idea behind Reform Judaism was to create a Judaism that would be more in line with the values of Enlightenment by eliminating rituals and beliefs that were seen as incompatible with progressive rationalist thinking (Langman, 1999). Over the years, Reform Judaism has re-introduced some of the earlier rituals and traditional elements (Langman, 1999). The Reform movement does not endorse the laws of kashrut (keeping kosher). However, today there are more and more Reform Jews who do keep kosher (Langman, 1999). Synagogue services tend to be a combination of English prayers, and Hebrew liturgy and men and women sit together. Overall, Reform Judaism is considered to be the least observant movement concerning halahkah.

**Religious identity** can be defined as an identity that is based on a specific religious belief system, rituals, and practices. These rituals and practices may be performed in public as well as at home. Association and practice of rituals with others who share the belief system tend to be essential in creating and maintaining a religious identity (Lucas, 2017).

***

#### Table of Contents
{: .no_toc}

<ul><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-1/">CHAPTER ONE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-2/">CHAPTER TWO</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-3/">CHAPTER THREE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-4/">CHAPTER FOUR</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-5/">CHAPTER FIVE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-6/">References</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-7/">Appendix A</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-8/">Appendix B</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-9/">Appendix C</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-10/">Appendix D</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-11/">Appendix E</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-12/">Appendix F</a></li></ul>

***

</div>
