---
layout: default
title: CHAPTER FIVE  
parent: § Antisemitism Today and Its Relationship to Jewish Identity and Religious Denomination   
grand_parent: A
nav_order: 50 
---
<style>
.dont-break-out {
  /* These are technically the same, but use both */
  overflow-wrap: break-word;
  word-wrap: break-word;

     -ms-word-break: break-all;
  /* This is the dangerous one in WebKit, as it breaks things wherever */
  word-break: break-all;
  /* Instead use this non-standard one: */
  word-break: break-word;
}

.youtube-container {
    position: relative;
    width: 100%;
    height: 0;
    padding-bottom: 56.25%;
}
.youtube-video {
    position: absolute;
    top: 0;
    left: 0;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
}

</style>

<div class="dont-break-out" markdown="1">

1. TOC
{:toc}

## CHAPTER FIVE
### Introduction
At the present time, it appears that there are only a small number of studies within the mental health counseling field that investigate the relationship between Jewish identity and experiences with antisemitism and Jewish denomination and experiences with antisemitism. The purpose of my study was to fill this gap of knowledge and to determine if there is a relationship between Jewish identity, more specifically, Jewish ethnic identity, Jewish religious identity, and experiences with antisemitism over the past year and the entire life. Additionally, I sought to determine whether there is any relationship between an individual´s Jewish affiliation with one of the three major Jewish movements (Reform, Conservative, Orthodox) and experiences with antisemitism. I collected the data for my study from a sample of 279 participants residing in the U.S. The results indicate that ethnic identity, religious identity, and affiliation play a significant role in predicting experiences with antisemitism. In order to analyze the data, I used a correlation matrix and multiple linear regressions. In this chapter I will discuss the results of the analysis with regard to my research questions. Implications for professional counselors working with Jewish clients and counselor educators teaching multicultural classes will be discussed. In addition, I will address limitations of this study and suggestions for future research in this chapter.

### Discussion
This study represents a first step into answering the following three questions: 1) What is the relationship between Jewish identity and experiences with antisemitism? 2) What is the relationship between Jewish religious affiliation and experiences with antisemitism? 3) What, if any, type of antisemitism (e.g., ethnically or religiously based antisemitism or anti-Zionism) do Jewish individuals experience most often?

#### Jewish Ethnic and Religious Identity
It is generally acknowledged that Jewish identity is composed of religious and ethnic components that tend to be intertwined (Friedlander et al., 2010; Friedman, Friedlander, & Blustein, 2005; Langman, 1999). The results of this study provide further evidence that Jewish ethnic identity and religious identity are two separate aspects of Jewish identity and thus support Herman´s theory about Jewish identity being a combination of ethnicity and religion (Herman, 1989). Hypothesis one was supported. It appears that ethnic identity has predictive value related to experiences with antisemitism in the entire life and perceived stress level but not antisemitism experienced in the past year. Specifically, Jewish participants with a stronger ethnic identity reported being exposed to antisemitism more often during their entire life than Jews with weaker ethnic identities. They also perceived the hatred of Jews as more stressful than did Jews with a weaker ethnic identity. These findings are similar to a recent study on antisemitism-related stress. According to Rosen, Kuczynski, and Kanter (2018), Jews with a stronger Jewish identity reported more collective experiences with antisemitism. The current study’s findings indicated that having a strong ethnic identity may explain a greater awareness of antisemitism, and thus may sensitize individuals to experiences with discrimination (Rosen et al., 2018). From an existential counseling perspective this may mean that individuals with a stronger Jewish identity may be more aware of being excluded by others, which may lead to feelings of isolation and meaninglessness (Frankl, 2008). Individuals with a stronger Jewish identity (combination of ethnic and religious identity) may be more susceptible to environmental factors such as hate crimes and the news coverage of these incidents (Cohen, 2010). Thus, there may be an interaction between Jewish identity and environmental elements on the awareness of hate crimes against the Jewish community (Cohen, 2010). This is also supported by an earlier research study in which participants who identified strongly with being Jewish reported facing more antisemitism and more stress when interacting with non-Jews (Friedlander et al., 2010).

Religious identity, in contrast, appears to have predictive value related to antisemitism experienced in the past year and the level of stress but not antisemitism experienced over the entire life. Considering the amount of antisemitic incidents that took place since the start of this study, the results do not come as a surprise. The last two years have been marked by a number of synagogue shootings as well as vandalism of buildings and Jewish cemeteries. By contrast, Rosen et al. (2018) reported that Jews with a stronger religious identity reported fewer experiences with antisemitism. These opposing findings may be partially attributed to the increase of more violent acts of hatred towards Jews that hit the Conservative community (e.g., synagogue shooting in Pittsburgh) and the Orthodox community (e.g., violence and killings in Jersey City and Monsey). In both communities members tend to report stronger religious practices compared to Reform Jews (Friedlander et al., 2010). This is also in line with existential theory and, more specifically, with Frankl´s Logotherapy where suffering can be a meaningful experience for individuals especially in those instances where suffering can be turned into a triumph (Frankl, 1988). This is especially true for the Orthodox community who tends to have a significantly higher religious identity than Conservative and Reform Jews (Friedlander et al., 2010; Rosmarin, Pirutinsky, Carp, Appel, & Kor, 2017; Rosmarin, Pirutinsky, & Siev, 2010) and tend to experience trials as a stimulus for spiritual growth (Rosmarin et al., 2017). The increase in vandalism of Jewish institutions and cemeteries as well as the rise of antisemitism on college campuses in the last couple of years may have impacted the results of my study. Data collection took place during the time when violent acts of hatred occurred. Thus, the timing of when the data was collected may have impacted the results of this study, which I will further discuss in the limitations section of this chapter.

#### Religious Denomination
The religious community in the U.S. is a diverse community with distinct streams of Judaism (Holliman & Wagner, 2011; Levitt & Balkin, 2003; Langman, 1999; Langman, 1995). The three major Jewish movements are Reform, Conservative, and Orthodox, and were the focus of this study (Popkin, 2015). This study represents a first step in providing some evidence as to the significance of an individual´s membership in one of the three major denominations. I proposed that religious denomination predicted exposure to antisemitism. I proposed that being a member of the Orthodox community would be associated with more exposure to antisemitism compared to the Conservative community. I also proposed that members of the Conservative community would be exposed more often to hatred of Jews compared to members of the Reform movement. This hypothesis was not supported.

Religious affiliation predicted experiences with antisemitism, however, in the opposite direction. Orthodox Jews and Conservative Jews reported significantly fewer experiences with antisemitism in the past year compared to Reform Jews. Orthodox Jews also reported a significantly lower level of stress compared to Reform Jews. Differences in adherence to halachah (Jewish laws and customs) and the strengths of religious beliefs may be a possible explanation of why Orthodox Jews reported lower levels of stress when exposed to hatred of Jews. Their strong religious beliefs impact not only their life at home but also relationships in general and work (Holliman & Wagner, 2011). Differences in religious coping may also explain lower stress levels.

According to Rosmarin, Pargament, and Flannelly (2009), members of the Orthodox community perceive struggles, especially spiritual struggles, to be revitalizing and enlightening as they provide the opportunity to overcome obstacles and remain steadfast in the face of adversity. It may be possible that Orthodox individuals view antisemitic attacks as spiritual struggles and thus draw strength from discriminatory experiences.

Orthodox and Conservative Jews also reported fewer antisemitic experiences in their entire life compared to Reform Jews. However, there was only a significant difference between Orthodox and Reform Jews. The difference between Reform and Conservative Jews was not significant. These findings are striking in particular when considering that a stronger ethnic and religious identity predicted more experiences with antisemitism. Moreover, previous research by Kremelberg and Dashefsky (2016) suggests that Orthodox Jews are more likely to report experiencing antisemitism than other denominations.

In general, Orthodox Jews tend to report a stronger ethnic identity and religious identity than Conservative Jews or Reform Jews (Friedlander et al., 2010). Thus, I expected Orthodox Jews to report more antisemitic experiences compared to individuals who indicated having a weaker Jewish identity. The results of this study seem to suggest that the relationship between Jewish identity, religious denomination, and experiences with antisemitism is complex and multifaceted. It may be possible that one´s religious affiliation may act as a buffer. Orthodox Jews in particular tend to live in tight knit communities, and usually do not engage with outside communities when they need support (Holliman & Wagner, 2011). Moreover, Orthodox Jews tend to interact primarily with individuals within their community (Holliman & Wagner, 2011). They are less likely than Reform or Conservative Jews to engage with non-Jews, and therefore, may be less likely to be exposed to antisemitism. It is possible that being a Reform Jew with a well-developed Jewish identity has different implications for the individual than being Orthodox with a strong Jewish identity. According to Smith (1991) “individuals who are embedded in their culture tend to be more “ethnically hardy” and resilient in their ethnic development than those who are more marginal with respect to their culture” (p. 183). In other words, having developed a deep connection with one´s culture of origin may protect individuals from developing a vulnerable identity, and at the same time assist individuals in those instances where they are confronted with discrimination because of their identity (Smith, 1991).

#### Type of Antisemitism
There are many different ways in which people can express their hatred for Jews. Antisemitism may be based on ethnic prejudice, religious prejudice, or anti-Israel sentiments. This study is a first step in providing some information as to what type of antisemitism participants experienced most often. It appears that ethnic prejudice is not as prevalent as antisemitism based on religious prejudice or anti-Israel attitudes. Nonetheless, discrimination based on ethnicity continues to be a key issue. This is evidenced by the fact that the majority of participants reported that antisemitism based on their ethnic group membership as Jews was the second highest form of antisemitism they encountered. Most participants reported that they experienced religious prejudice or anti-Zionism the most often, with anti-Zionism reported slightly more often than religious prejudice. The data presented in this study suggests that all three types of antisemitism need to be considered when addressing hatred of Jews in general. Since I could not find any other studies discussing the prevalence of the different types of antisemitism it is impossible to say whether my findings are typical or not.

### Professional Implications
It appears to be common for Jewish individuals to experience antisemitism at some point in their lives. The results of this study, as well as earlier research about Jewish identity, Jewish denominations, and experiences with antisemitism have implications for professional counselors working with Jewish clients as well as counselor educators who prepare future counselors to work with diverse clients. I will address first implications that are important for both professional groups. Then I will continue with implications that are more specifically geared towards professional counselors and counselor educators.

### Implications for Professional Counselors and Counselor Educators 
The existing multicultural counseling competencies, which are divided into the four categories counselor self-awareness, knowledge of client´s worldview, counseling relationship, and advocacy, provide a helpful framework for professional counselors who work with Jewish clients and counselor educators who prepare future counselors to work with minorities such as Jews (Ratts et al., 2016). Self-awareness refers to the idea of exploring personal beliefs. Professional counselors and counselor educators should examine their beliefs about the socioeconomic status of Jews and the marginalization and discrimination of Jews (Flasch & Fulton, 2019).

Based on the findings of this study professional counselors and counselor educators working with Jewish clients or students in the classroom need to be aware that Jewish identity tends to be comprised of ethnic and religious components that are distinct from each other yet intertwined. Jewish identity is not comparable to other ethnic (e.g., Italians or Norwegians) or religious (e.g., Catholics or Protestants) groups because Jews are an ethno-religious group. This is a critical piece of information as previous research suggests that American Jews in general tend to view their ethnic Jewish identity as more relevant than their religious practice (Friedlander et al., 2010). The erroneous belief that Jewish identity is based exclusively on religious aspects may cause professional counselors to overlook important issues such as experiences with antisemitism.

Professional counselors and counselor educators may want to examine their beliefs about Jewish identity in general, however it is equally important to gain a better understanding on how Jewish religious and ethnic identity impact an individual´s perception of antisemitism. To do so both professional counselors and counselor educators need to gain knowledge about Jewish culture, religious practices, as well as variations in religious observance and religious denominations (Langman, 1999).

Professional counselors and counselor educators may want to reflect on their internalized assumptions about secular Jews or less religious Jews, especially because the findings of this study suggest that Reform Jews report facing hatred more often than Conservative and Orthodox Jews. Thus, being a secular Jew or a less religious Jew does not protect an individual from experiences with antisemitism based on religious prejudice, ethnic prejudice, or anti-Zionism.

In addition, professional counselors and counselor educators may want to reflect on their personal beliefs about what constitutes antisemitism. Current statistics show that more than 50% of all religious hate crimes target the Jewish community (FBI, 2019). However, based on this study, it appears that exposure to antisemitism is not necessarily based on religious bias. In fact, the type of antisemitism that participants reported most often was anti-Zionism closely followed by religious bias. Professional counselors and counselor educators can play an important role in addressing antisemitism and advocating for their Jewish clients. However, in order to effectively fight antisemitism, it is crucial that all types of antisemitism are addressed, including anti-Zionism and antisemitism based on ethnic prejudice. Therefore, it is important that professional counselors learn more about the various ways in which hatred for Jews may be expressed.

#### Implications for Professional Counselors
To be able to provide culturally sensitive and effective counseling services, professional counselors may want to assess clients´ religious and cultural identity and explore how the various aspects of Jewish identity manifest in their daily life. This study also indicates that having a strong ethnic identity plays an important role with regard to the stress level and the amount of times an individual has been exposed to antisemitism during their entire life. Thus, it is recommended that counselors thoroughly assess a client´s religious and cultural identity as both of these identity pieces may provide counselors with valuable information. Professional counselors may want to ask Jewish clients about their level of religiosity and how engaged they are in their Jewish community (Flasch & Fulton, 2019). Moreover, counselors may want to ask if their clients feel shame or pride in being Jewish and if they subscribe to a particular denomination within Judaism.

The findings of this study suggest that a strong religious identity impacts the perception of stress when exposed to antisemitism as well as how often an individual is exposed to antisemitism over the past year. Professional counselors may want to ask in what ways Jewish clients identify as part of the Jewish community, if they self-identify as Jews based on a combination of religious and ethnic aspects, and if one of the two aspects carry more meaning than the other. Professional counselors may also want to explore their clients´ connection to Israel, as many Jews in the U.S. tend to have a strong connection to the country and have family members who live in Israel.

Professional counselors may also want to gain more in-depth knowledge about Jewish culture, religious practices, and the variations in religious observance as this may help them in gaining a better understanding of their client´s worldview and its impact on the client’s lifestyle. To gain more knowledge about Jewish identity and the interpretation of Jewish religious laws it may be beneficial for professional counselors to form partnerships or establish relationships with rabbis of the Reform, Conservative, and Orthodox movement. Collaborating with rabbis may help counselors in building a relationship with the community in question and may help counselors and counselor educators to get a better understanding of the needs of that particular community. This may be important when working with Orthodox clients because they tend to be insular and often rely on networks within their community (Holliman & Wagner, 2011). However, this may be even more important when working with Jews of the Reform movement as they tend to be impacted by antisemitism significantly more often than Orthodox Jews, according to the results of my study.

#### Implications for Counselor Educators 
To ensure that future counselors can fulfill their roles as advocates for the Jewish community, it is necessary that counselor educators include Jewish issues such as antisemitism in all its forms in the counselor preparation curriculum. Antisemitic incidents can impact the sense of safety and psychological functioning of Jewish individuals (Weinberg, 2011). Professional counselors can support Jewish clients in developing appropriate coping skills, however, in order to provide adequate support professional counselors need to be aware of all of the issues impacting the Jewish community in the first place. Counselor educators may want to add additional readings about Jewish topics to class readings such as religious and cultural practices, or how Shabbat observance may impact an individual´s career options. In addition, counselor educators may want to assist their students in exploring assumptions and possible faulty beliefs about Jewish issues such as Jewish identity and antisemitism.

Lastly, counselor educators may want to advocate for the inclusion of Jewish issues in all counselor preparation classes and textbooks. For instance, future textbooks on multicultural aspects should include information about Jewish identity development, differences among Jewish denominations, and the various types of antisemitism such as anti-Zionism. Textbooks on career counseling may want to address career issues for Shabbat-observing individuals or Orthodox women with many children. Textbooks on counseling skills and theories may add information about how Jewish culture may impact Jewish clients´ expectations in a counseling session. For instance, Jewish clients may be interested in discussing or debating their diagnosis and the case conceptualization in their session which may be off-putting for professional counselors, especially if they have not been prepared for this possibility (Levitt & Balkin, 2003).

It is time for the counseling profession to include antisemitism when discussing multicultural topics such as racism, oppression, and discrimination, as 96% of the participants in this study have become targets of antisemitism at some point in time in their lives. The hatred of Jews in its different expressions continues to be a pervasive issue in the U.S. and worldwide. This hatred needs to be addressed in addition to that experienced by other minority groups because the results of this study indicate that Jews are victimized based on anti-Zionist attitudes, as well as religious and ethnic prejudice. More specifically, all mental health professionals need to understand that the hatred of Jews is a combination of racism, religious bias, and socioeconomic bias; in order to support Jewish individuals all facets of antisemitism need to be addressed. The recent shootings and stabbings combined with the latest hate crime statistics illustrate that antisemitism is well and alive. A closer look at the perpetrators, who may be of any skin color or shade, reveals that the motivation for murdering Jews can be based on religious bias as well as ethnic bias. Thus, professional counselors and counselor educators need to gain a better understanding about the different forms of antisemitism and the consequences and engage in self-reflection to explore to what extent they hold antisemitic views.

### Limitations of the Study
This study contains several limitations suggesting that more research will be necessary to fully understand the complexity of Jewish identity and antisemitism. The data for this study was collected online relying on snowball sampling and convenience sampling. In general, convenience sampling has limited generalizability and it is more likely that there may be an over or underrepresentation of a specific population compared to a probability sampling (Heppner et al., 2008). This may have been the case in this study. As a member of a Conservative synagogue who lives in an Orthodox neighborhood, I have many close connections to other Conservative and Orthodox Jews. This fact may be the reason why the largest sample of participants came from Conservative Jews and not as expected from Reform Jews. In this study, 39% of participants reported being part of the Conservative movement as compared to 19% who reported being Reform Jews. Yet previous research suggests that the Reform movement is the biggest movement among the three major affiliations (Pew Research Center, 2013). It is possible that the results of this study are biased as there may have been a significant difference between people who chose to participate and those who decided not to participate. Moreover, data was collected online, and thus individuals without internet access were excluded from this study.

In addition, it is important to point out that almost half (46.6%) of the participants in this study live in New Jersey and New York. Therefore, the results may not be generalizable to Jews living in other states such as Florida or California as regional differences may exist. Overall, participants in this sample were well-educated. Most participants (75.9%) reported having a bachelors or higher degree. There may be significant differences between individuals with a higher education and those who have an associate´s or a high school degree. Thus, the generalizability of this study may be limited as the level of education may impact how often participants are confronted with discrimination.

Another limitation of this study may be the length of the survey, as evidenced by the fact that out of 408 participants 279 individuals completed the first two parts of the survey and only 222 completed the entire survey. It is conceivable that meaningful differences exist between those participants who completed the entire survey and those who completed it only partially. Thus, the results may not accurately reflect the experiences of all Jews in the U.S.

A further limitation of this study is the use of the GED to measure experiences with antisemitism. The GED measures ethnic discrimination exclusively and measures neither religious discrimination nor anti-Zionism. In addition, the GED does not take into account existing stereotypes about Jews (e.g., Jews are greedy). Thus, it is possible that participants underreported how often they have been exposed to antisemitism and how stressful the situation was for them because the survey did not prompt them to answer questions related to religious bias or anti-Israel attitudes. Considering that experiences with anti-Zionism were reported most often, closely followed by discrimination based on religion, it is highly probable that the results of this study could have been more pronounced if all experiences with discrimination had been included in the measure of experiences with antisemitism. The GED may be a valid assessment tool that can be applied to measure stressors for ethnic groups, however, it is not an ideal assessment tool to measure the stressors experienced by ethno-religious groups such as Jews. Despite these limitations this study indicates that when exploring Jewish identity in a counseling setting it is vital to explore both religious and ethnic aspects of Jewish identity. Additionally, the study contributes to a better understanding of the role that religious denomination plays and provides insight about the prominence of anti-Zionism as a form of racism.

#### Suggestions for Future Research
As far as I am aware the present study is a first attempt in analyzing the relationship between Jewish identity, religious denomination, and experiences with antisemitism. Future researchers may want to repeat this study using an assessment tool that is better equipped to measure a wide range of antisemitic experiences including anti-Zionism and religious prejudice to expand on the scientific understanding of antisemitic-related stressors in the Jewish community. It would be beneficial to include other streams of Judaism such as the Reconstructionist movement or Jews who report being secular or atheist in future research. This would allow for a more nuanced picture of how often and how stressful antisemitic experience are for different Jewish groups.

This study provided some interesting new information that created further questions. For instance, Orthodox and Conservative Jews reported experiencing fewer antisemitic incidents in the past year, even though both groups tend to have a stronger religious identity than Reform Jews. In light of the many violent antisemitic attacks that impacted the Orthodox and Conservative communities over the last two years this is puzzling. It appears that there may be a buffer that protects these groups from antisemitism. However, it is not clear what it is that acts as a buffer. Future research could provide answers that could be helpful in assisting Jewish clients avoid becoming a victim of antisemitism in the first place. More specifically, future researchers may want to explore if there are significant differences in behavior or attitude between Jewish individuals who have experienced antisemitism and those individuals who have not. Furthermore, Orthodox Jews in this study reported lower levels of stress when exposed to antisemitism. Future researchers may want to explore this phenomenon to get a better understanding of factors that impact an individual´s mental health.

To gain a better understanding of how antisemitism impacts the mental health and overall well-being of Jewish individuals, future investigators may want to use a qualitative research approach. A qualitative approach may be useful in getting in-depth information as to how Jews cope with antisemitism. Lastly, future researchers may want to continue exploring what type of antisemitism Jews experience most often and if the type of antisemitism experienced significantly changes how stressful an antisemitic incident is deemed.

### Conclusion
Overall, this study provided new knowledge with regard to Jewish identity and antisemitism. Both a strong religious and strong ethnic identity play an important role when it comes to the perception of antisemitism. Individuals with a strong Jewish identity tend to report experiencing more antisemitic related stressors than individuals with a weaker Jewish identity. Membership in one of the three major denominations is another aspect of Jewish identity that significantly contributes to experiences with antisemitism. Orthodox Jews and to a lesser degree Conservative Jews, appear to be exposed to antisemitism less often than Reform Jews. Counselor educators and professional counselors working with Jewish students or clients need to consider all aspects of Jewish identity and be careful not to make assumptions of what it means to identify as a Jew in the U.S. The erroneous belief that Jews are just a religious group or that less religious Jews experience less antisemitism or that antisemitism is not a serious issue can lead to misunderstandings and to the minimization of painful experiences. Thus, a clinician’s lack of awareness or a clinician’s bias may exacerbate mental health issues in Jewish clients. According to Comas-Díaz, Hall, and Neville (2019) exposure and re-exposure to racial stressors such as antisemitism can become traumatic.

***

#### Table of Contents
{: .no_toc}

<ul><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-1/">CHAPTER ONE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-2/">CHAPTER TWO</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-3/">CHAPTER THREE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-4/">CHAPTER FOUR</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-5/">CHAPTER FIVE</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-6/">References</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-7/">Appendix A</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-8/">Appendix B</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-9/">Appendix C</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-10/">Appendix D</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-11/">Appendix E</a></li><li> <a href="/docs/A/Antisemitism-Today-and-Its-Relationship-to-Jewish-Identity-and-Religious-Denomination-12/">Appendix F</a></li></ul>

***

</div>
